You want, would you like to come to the front? Thank you.
There is somebody ahead of me.
I'm the speaker. No, no, we know that,
but I, I wanted to invite you too.
Yeah, we've got, um, five minutes with you, Ms. Jones.
Oh, I dunno whether you've been watching,
but my advice is, um, if you can just leave a little bit
of time for questions, but the time is yours
and I'll just let you get,
get yourself sorted before we start
The clock. And, uh,
just making sure Kira, members the committee,
lovely to have the opportunity to speak.
And this t-shirt, if there was a whole mass of us,
might be seen as part of a protest or demonstration
because it's only me presenting today, I'll take it
that it is not going to result in me being hauled off by
The No, we, we, heaven forbid, but please
Just, um,
you may have noticed I did a very short submission on this.
I have done longer ones on some other inquiries and bills,
but we've had a very busy year
and as I said, my name is Kay Jones
and I'm a regular protestor
and I have been so since my childhood as a child,
I heard from my mother's parents about their
backgrounds and beliefs.
My grandmother was an elder in her church.
My grandfather fought for New Zealand in World War I
and was ind out with mustard gas.
When he returned to civilian life, he worked on the trams
and became a member of the Tramways Union.
This is in the early sort of days, you know,
back in the 1920s, both
of them believed in standing up for their beliefs.
My father's parents died of tuberculosis when he was, um, 10
because of the cold dam housing.
They didn't get the opportunity
to protest against the standards of housing
or scum landlords who put them in that situation.
So it would be disrespectful of me not to stand up
for beliefs and values that I believe in.
My first street march was when I was 11
for an environmental cause.
Over the years, I have marched against sporting tours
of South Africa because of apartheid.
I've marched with unions for workers' rights.
I've marched with, um, others in support
of marriage equality appearing
before a select committee is a continuance of
that participation in democracy.
Now with this bill, we've heard a bit about
people, um, like committee member concerned about
banging of, um, pots and pans at 4:00 AM outside residences.
If it was the summary offenses, disturbances of the peace,
um, near residential accommodation,
I might say please add in student parties
and NCDA roadworks
and anything else that causes similar
disruption to people's.
I've had to put up with those.
I haven't been able to call the police
and say, Hey, arrest those people
because they've ignored my request to do,
to close down the noise.
But there's noise control laws,
there's this other disturbances one.
So I'm echoing also the concerns
of the Council for Civil Liberties
and the Law Society, uh, sorry, law commission about
what does near mean.
If you ask one of the 15,000 police officers
or personnel in this country, how they measure near
you would probably get 15,000 different responses
when we have protested at parliament directing it to,
for example, prime Minister Luxon.
Did it matter that he at the time had an apartment across
the road in the Kate Shepherd apartment?
We could have been directing the protest against him,
but did his residence come into the question of
where it was legal or not legal to protest?
So I could go on, but I, I'd rather sort
of see if there's any questions about my decades of protests
and what is acceptable or not.
And also whether the law's needed it isn't.
Thank you, Ms. Jones. Um, as you can see, we've got
Mr. Stevenson.
Thanks. Thanks for your submission.
Um, in your submission.
Um, so accepting everything you've said about the, the bill,
but you've helpfully you talked about the idea
of near being undefined
and your submission, you talk about potentially 20 meters.
Well, that was as an example, across the side of the road.
If you're talking, um, about like I do,
I do echo sort of what the Council
for the Civil Liberties said in relation to safe spaces
and the 150 meters, um, regulated, um, distance for,
um, people going to get a termination
of a pregnancy at a medical facility.
And that is a proportionate, reasonable, um, response,
especially to the very aggressive protests
that have happened, including in in Wellington,
outside the facility there.
So that distance, I gave that as an example though.
'cause for one person, 20 meters is near for another person.
300 meters is near.
I mean, we're further away from, um,
the, the, the vice premier house and, and,
and those situations.
But also if we're talking noise
disruption, I'm a like sleeper.
I have tinnitus. When I hear the roadworks
that are two streets away from me at 3:00 AM in the morning,
it feels near because it disturbs my sleep.
Supplementary. Yeah,
There go. But I don't
actually seek to have a law to, to challenge
that because we've already got noise control.
We've already got other things
and my sensitivities,
I'm not perhaps the basis on which laws should be based
In your, um, decades of protest experience.
Have you ever protested
300 meters down the road from the target of the protest
Outside the American embassy when we've been protesting
against some of the, um, violence that it has been sort
of enabling overseas
and there are people who live at the American Embassy
or in the, the grounds of that
and that if we take the border yes, that would be the case.
There's also been cases where a protest has been a march
and, sorry, organized. Sorry, clarify.
I'll, I just wanna clarify your, what you said by border.
So you're saying, you are saying there
Is a large fence around the,
So you are on the fence of the embassy?
Yes. Alright. So it wasn't 300 meters down the
road from the embassy.
It was on the border of the embassy. We're at
The border of The embassy, so never 300
down meters down the road. The
Buildings are slightly further back,
but I haven't measured them.
Okay. But they've also been ones
where there's been a protest march,
which I have not been an organizer
of, but I've been part of.
And when has this gone to wherever the target is.
In some cases it's been also saying this person
who has an important role with that organization,
they live in an apartment there,
let's go out protest outside that.
And I have not necessarily gone myself,
but I have not been critical of those people
who did so 'cause this
Bill. So they went
down outside the apartment. Yeah.
So the, so the answer
to my question is you've never protested
300 meters down the road.
I couldn't from the target.
I couldn't swear to it
because like, as I say, I'm now sixties,
so it's a non example in my sixties
and I've been protesting since I was 11.
I mean, unless you've put the time to listen to me go
through every single one
of those protests and I don't think we have. No, that's
Right. That's alright.
Right. Any other questions from members?
I will have one more from, uh, Ms. B.
Thank you. Kay. I'm just wondering whether the point
you're making is about the clarity of the law?
Yeah, very much so. That this is a very muddled law.
And when you're relying on a police officer doing their
best, but in some cases a junior officer without much
experience and they're sort of saying, oh,
is this disruptive?
A neighbor might be saying it's disruptive.
It may not in fact be, um, disrupting the person
who is the target of the protest.
Um, they may, and having that thing of like being able
to issue a formal warning, which was taken off the books
for a while, but it's back on
and if you read the Crown Law opinion
and there's current guidance from the police,
that's actually fine Now they just have
to be clear about it.
And that level of clarity is really important
to the frontline staff who would be having to enforce that.
And that's our former public servant.
I always think what's the impact on the people who have
to carry out the law, not just what does the law say
and what examples is it setting?
So if you don't have clarity, then how can you be sure
that it will be exercised fairly?
So either don't do it at all and rely on other rules
and check whether there's any need to strengthen, whether
that's noise or any disturbance of the peace type provisions
or if you're going ahead, engage thoroughly
with legal experts to make sure
that you're not doing something that's going
to create more court challenges later
because there wasn't any understanding.
And these cases do go to the high court
and they tie up a lot of time
and taxpayers money
when it could have been sorted out at this point. Mm.
Hey, well thank you for coming today in person.
And um, it's a very nice, um,
t-shirt if I could call it that. Yes.
This is by, um, yeah, that's the, the bloody Samoan. Okay.
Um, um, who is a wonderful local, um, Samoan artist
and um, you know, we can get things from Mr. Right.
Cool. Thank you. Right now who, who have we got next
Before that?
Oh, right. Um, Mr. Matthews. Yeah, sorry.
Um, we've got five minutes.
Sorry, chair. Before that, can I just, um, ask the chair
to also, just to remind the committee,
we've seen multiple instances
of committee members working over submitters
and just to remind people to just show a little decorum,
you may not agree with the submission, but,
Okay. Alright.
Thank you Mr. Matthews.
Um, we've got five minutes with you.
Okay. Everybody, can you hear me?
Yeah, we can, um, just,
Sorry. I'm, I'm,
I'm actually outside, uh, the Indonesian embassy.
Uh, my name's, I'm a research fellow at Victoria University.
Um, my, um, PhD was about, uh, climate process
and particularly the policing process.
And I thought I would, uh, submit in this kind
of unusual place, um,
because of one of the concerns in relation, this bill
that I've had, uh, time at times I've come to this embassy
to protest particularly over issues to do with East,
um, a couple of decades ago.
Um, and one of the concerns I have with this bill is, uh,
what, what it means for protest outside places such as emba.
Um, so I just wanna make a couple of points for questions.
Um, I think the bill possibly has, uh,
what I would say insufficient protection for freedom
of expression and protest rights.
Um, and I don't think it necessarily is, um, useful, uh,
in relation to some of the existing laws that already occur
and some of the incidents we've seen in the media recently.
Um, the incident, for example, at wins Peter's house, um,
is already covered by existing laws such as damage, TPAs,
obstruction, um, noise concerns, those sort of things.
Um, so I wonder if we already have legislation
issues, parliament.
Um, I just wanna, um,
of things if you're gonna amend this bill and pass it.
Um, one that I think the, there's a couple
of bad definitions in the bill,
and particularly the definition
of private residents really is quite broad
and it captures, um, process at places such as embassies.
Um, you could think of a, um, a process outside of business,
which is a reside.
Um, and secondly, it doesn't, uh,
unlike our tpa doesn't allow our facility for people
to be warned that they're crossing a line in the fees
exercise and discretion and say, look, you need
to this down or, or leave.
Um, and so we can have some more moderation in
that rather than, um, a law can be done quite quickly.
Um, also I just wanna suggest
that the law doesn't necessarily address the harassment
of public figures in a whole bunch of other spaces.
Um, uh, both public spaces,
but also online spaces
where a lot of this stuff is happening.
Um, and so it feels like a, a kind
of a very targeted attack on a, on a very small problem.
Thank you. I welcome your questions.
Right. Hey, thank you for doing that.
And, um, uh, good to see, um,
something happening in real life, right.
Members, we've got any, um, questions?
No, I suppose the, um, the only question I would say,
Mr. Matthews, your very first point in your recommendations
to include the protection for freedom of expression
and protest rights, you're saying
that's really important, needs to be included.
What we've heard today is that, um, Bora doesn't actually,
uh, recognize the need to, uh, allow people
to have peaceful enjoyment of their own private property.
And so isn't that more
because there, there's already a right to protest,
there's already a right to do that.
What what doesn't seem to be in the legislation
or captured anywhere actually is the right to peaceful, um,
enjoyment of your property.
So how would you reconcile those two themes?
I, I think that raises a broader issue.
And, you know, we're seeing it with a disinformation
and a bunch of things, public figures
and political figures, um,
being harassed online and in person.
Um, you know, we've, we've witnessed that with er, you know,
but it's across the political, I think
that's a serious issue,
but I think that needs to be addressed across the range
of context rather than saying people should be, uh, have
that right in their private residence,
but then once they walk out on the street, all of a sudden
they don't have that right.
Um, they've got a lot of problem
with online spaces and harassment.
So, so we need to I think, deal with
that issue across multiple contexts rather than just dealing
with here and saying it'll re everybody everywhere else.
Okay. Very good. Hey, thank you very much
for joining us from the street.
Thank you. Okay, thanks Mr. Smith. Right now we've got,
so we've got, um, Carol Hannigan.
Uh, I think that's correct. Carol, are you with us?
I am with you, but I'm just figuring out, uh,
my video. I'm, um,
Well, you've got a don't don't worry too much.
Just, um, take your time,
see if you've got, we've got a couple minutes.
There we Go. Oh, very good. Perfect.
There we go. Right. So, um,
Now we've got five minutes with you, Carol.
Um, so looking forward to hearing from you.
Thank you so much. Thank you for the time today.
Um, I'm a former lawyer
and I ask that my written submission,
which outlines the specific
and legal democratic flaws in this bill be taken as read.
I'm here submitting today orally
to provide a different context.
It's a warning, the effects of this government's policy,
directions being felt as harmful
by Kiwis across the motto, I'm one of them.
I lived this, the success story.
This government preaches responsible, independent,
and insured against misfortune.
A single brain injury shattered that narrative.
My precautions failed
and that exposed the brutal lie of bootstrap ideology.
Now my survival depends entirely on the social safety net.
I once helped fund this year
that safety net failed when my housing was taken.
The response from MSD
and my MP was a study in bureaucratic indifference.
I'm now secure only through the privilege
of wealthy friends, a lifeline most people in
my situation will never have.
And my story is a reflection
of our na national microcosm across Altera is Kiwis raise
their voices against hardship.
They face a coordinated machinery of silence,
spin, and confusion.
This bill is not to be taken in isolation.
It belongs to a suite of legislation that fits a pattern
recognized by scholars.
The predictable sequence of democratic erosion
we're on a well-documented path.
The first step in that sequence is a dehumanization
labeling people wet whining bottom feeders
isn't me name calling.
It's political groundwork.
It's an act of othering required
to make a nation accept the removal of our rights.
The next is to control information and create scapegoats.
Those who don't know their history are doomed to repeat it.
And yet we're seeing proposals
to remove large important chunks
of our own history from school curricular.
At the same time, vilifying Maori
and other marginalized people I've watched people I love
become mouthpieces for atrocities
enthusiastically advocating for the starvation
and killing of children they've been taught to see as other.
This is the monstrous, logical end
of the scapegoating we're witnessing.
The final crucial step is to criminalize the dissent
that inevitably follows.
I don't support targeting homes.
However, occasionally forcing our mps
to hear our voices is sometimes necessary.
This coalition is especially out of touch
with the majority of Kiwis.
And frankly, if protesting peacefully
outside someone's home is what it takes to get them
to sit up and notice this, then that's what it takes.
But this bill isn't just about mps private homes,
the definition of personal residence as a trap.
It's so broad that it would ban protests outside embassies,
which are considered the personal residences of ambassadors.
I believe that silence and criticism
of foreign governments is the likely
unstated intention here.
This bill is so broad,
it could limit protests near any building with a residence,
including the apartment.
This reveals its true purpose, a catchall offense designed
to criminalize dissent wherever it occurs.
True public safety requires a valve for peaceful protest.
When you block lawful dissent, you inevitably funnel
that energy towards unlawful acts,
suppressing lawful protest risks,
increasing unlawful acts since the crimes act already
adequately addresses violence.
This bill is not just unnecessary, but provocative.
We must not erode the safety valve of the peaceful protest.
It's necessary regardless of intent.
The practical effect of this bill is to send a message
that we should all sit down, shut up and take it.
We are aligning with governments.
The UN and ICJ confirm of committing war crimes one
as recently as this morning.
That is not who we are.
Altura has a tradition of speaking truth to power
of standing strong in our values.
We need to reclaim this legacy.
We need to stop ignoring
or worse facilitating what our allies are perpetrating.
Today. We're in a position to decide which side
of history we wanna be on,
and I submit that there is moral, historical,
and legal imperative to reject this bill.
Thank you. Those are my submissions.
Thank you, uh, Ms. Hannahgram.
And now have we got any, um, questions, Dr. Nan?
No. Alright. Hey, thank you very much. Thank you.
Um, and for taking the time to do that this morning,
um, this afternoon.
Very helpful, thank you.
Thank you for the opportunity.
Okay. Right now we are going to, I think,
is it, uh, neem?
Yeah. Green, uh, neem o Flynn from Greenpeace. Ro
good afternoon.
Got, can you hear me okay? Yes, we can.
Great. Thank you.
Lemme just get my screen sorted with rejoin.
Great. Am I good to go?
Yes, please. Perfect. We've got 10 minutes with you.
Great. Thank you. Um, Ko Ka. Um, my name's Nivo Flynn.
I'm speaking on behalf of Greenpeace ua.
Um, I'm sure some of what I have
to say you've heard from others today,
but I represent the tens of thousands
of Greenpeace supporters from across Alua.
So we really appreciate the opportunity to appear before you
and discuss this bill.
Um, that in our view represents a serious threat
to the democratic freedoms that New Zealanders hope you, uh,
Greenpeace opposes this bill in its entirety at its heart.
We believe this bill seeks to criminalize protest, um,
which is a vital, vital democratic right
that has helped shape Tito's history and identity.
And we believe that how we treat protest matters, um,
public protest isn't a nuisance to be managed.
It's a cornerstone of our democracy, um,
from women's suffrage to our nuclear free stance.
Progress in this country has always depended on the ability
of citizens to stand up and speak out,
and sometimes that makes those empower uncomfortable.
For many New Zealanders protest is not the first step.
It's a last resort. People go through these processes
of writing submissions and contacting their mps and voting
and signing petitions.
Um, but when those formal channels fail
to deliver meaningful change,
peaceful protest is the only remaining way
to make our voices heard.
So therefore, to restrict protest is
to silence those who've already exhausted every
other democratic avenue.
And it sends the message that speaking truth
to power is permitted only when it's convenient.
Um, and that really undermines the very essence
of participatory democracy.
This bill risks silencing the public voice.
It would punish people for what it terms targeted
and disruptive demonstrations near residential premises.
And those terms are so vague
and so broad that almost any peaceful
protest could fall within them.
Um, we know that protest is important for democracy
and the effectiveness of protest depends on being seen
and being heard by decision makers,
and that sometimes at their offices, sometimes
outside parliament and occasionally near their homes
or the residences of diplomatic representatives.
Uh, one of the examples, um,
in our written submission is the, uh,
Supreme Court in Morse Police.
Uh, they made it very clear saying that it's legitimate
for protestors to choose the time and the place
and the manner of their protest to ensure
that the message is effective.
And this bill would strip citizens of that, right?
It tells New Zealanders that you can protest, but only when
and where it doesn't bother anyone in power.
And that is not democracy.
That is convenience for the powerful.
We also submit that there are existing laws
that already cover harmful conduct in protests.
So if the purpose of this bill is to manage protests
that get out of hand, then it's unnecessary.
We already have extensive laws to deal with protests
that cross the line into intimidation,
harassment, or public disorder.
The summary of offenses Act already prohibits disorderly
behavior and offensive language obstruction,
um, and intimidation.
The Trespass Act protects private property.
The Harassment Act protects individuals from
sustained or targeted abuse.
There is no gap in the law that this bill needs to fill.
What this bill would do instead is create a new offense
where none is needed
and give police sweeping discretion to decide what counts,
um, when it comes to protest as disruptive.
So we submit that the bill's drafting is so vague
and so broad that it invites overreach.
It doesn't define what near means.
So it opens the question
of could a protest on a main street be deemed near a
residence that happened to be above a shop?
Um, it doesn't require any proof
that a protest was actually disruptive, only
that a person ought to have known that it might be.
Um, and we think that that kind
of uncertainty creates a chilling effect.
People will avoid protesting for fear of arrest,
and it's at that point when democracy starts to erode.
So as drafted, even peaceful protests outside
of embassies could be criminalized simply
because ambassadors happen to live in the buildings
where they work and potentially in central civic areas if,
if officials live nearby.
Um, and I would submit the protests in these spaces has long
been part of New Zealand's democratic tradition, um,
including from the protests over the dawn raids
and the Vietnam War.
So it goes, it goes far back.
And the breadth of this bill goes far
beyond its stated goal of protecting privacy.
As you've heard from other submitters,
this bill is also inconsistent with the New Zealand Bill
of Rights Act and our international obligations under the
I-C-C-P-R, it undermines the rights to freedom
of expression, freedom of peaceful assembly, freedom
of association, and freedom of movement.
Article 17 of the I-C-C-P-R,
which the bill's explanatory note, um, sites
protects against arbitrary
unlawful interference with privacy.
Peaceful protest isn't arbitrary or unlawful.
And by contrast, the articles 1921
and 22 affirm the very rights
that this bill is seeking to curtail.
Um, there's also precedent, uh, not precedent,
precedent in, uh, Booker v.
Police from 2007, um, where the Supreme Court held
that protest outside
of private residence can be legitimate political expression.
The majority found that annoyance
or discomfort does not crimin, uh,
does not justify criminalization.
Um, and I quote here, A tendency
to annoy others even seriously is insufficient to cons
to constitute a disruption to public order.
And that principle, in my view, remains true today.
Democracy requires tolerance of speech
and actions that might disturb inconvenience
and embarrass people in power.
And the right to privacy cannot outweigh the public's right
to hold its leaders to account.
So wellness bill might seem minor.
Its implications are profound.
It does shift, um, will,
it signals a shift away from an open free society in which
the right to pro protest peacefully is enshrined
and moves us towards controlled dissent.
It tells ordinary people, students, workers,
environmental defenders that our right
to protest can be revoked when it becomes
politically inconvenient.
And we should be working to strengthen
New Zealand's long history
of peaceful protest, not weaken it.
So in summary, Greenpeace submits
that this bill is unnecessary.
We already have laws that cover harmful protest behavior.
It's dangerously vague, um, which risks overreach
and chilling, lawful protest.
It conflicts with fundamental rights under, um, Anza Bora
and international law and undermines democracy
by shielding decision makers from accountability.
So for these reasons, Greenpeace Altoro urges the committee
to reject this bill in its entirety.
We submit that a strong democracy doesn't fear
protest, it protects it.
So thank you for the opportunity to submit
and I welcome any questions that you have.
Well, thank you for that.
Um, Mr. Flynn, um, I'm just looking around at members.
Look, um, well, I was gonna ask you towards the end there,
you sort of implied, uh, uh, that it was
because the need to protest is such an important thing.
You, you don't have, you don't seem to,
in your conversation, have regard for any of the pro privacy
or protection or quiet enjoyment of, of politicians
or judges or whatever.
Do you think there, at
what point do you think a protest becomes, uh,
disruptive in front of say, a judge
or a politician or whatever?
What, what do you gauge that boundary to be?
Well, I think when we start to consider being comfortable
or not uncomfortable as a right, that's, that's kind
of the slippery slope here for me.
Um, I did acknowledge privacy.
Um, we have, you know, the harassment act, the Trespass Act,
uh, we protect private property.
So I think that is already accounted for in existing law.
Um, so obviously we need to treat people with respect,
but we do need to be able to challenge ideas.
And as I pointed out, um, earlier, I think when we've been
through every other official channel
to make our voices heard as members of the public, um,
protest really is a last resort.
Yeah, I heard that justification.
But, um, so do you think, uh, protesting
outside someone's house all night long with pots
and plants, is that, do you think
that's getting past the point of being disruptive
or you think just 'cause someone's chosen a public office
and some people happen to have a dis uh,
different view on a policy, the means justify the, um,
sorry, the s justify the means and
therefore you're entitled to do
what you like at four o'clock and in the morning.
I'm just trying to understand where you
see the boundary to be.
Well, I'm, I'm not a, um, a police person or a judge
and I would leave it to them to, uh,
to interpret the harassment act.
Um, but I think there are laws that cover harassment.
Um, and similarly, if my child decided to play
drums at four o'clock in the morning, I would expect that,
um, the neighbors would make a noise complaint
and that would be dealt with, um, under existing laws.
Okay. Now I've got a question from, um, Ms. Nle.
Yeah. Um, Ms. O Flynn.
So you, you, um, there's a strong message there
that if this law passes
that it will seriously undermine democracy
and people's right to protest.
Um, so is it not clear
that this is about residential premises, um,
protesting in front of or next to a residential premises?
Do you feel that's not clear enough in the new, um,
proposed offense engaging in targeted
and disruptive demonstration new residential premises?
Do we need to make it clearer if it's not clear?
Because the way you make it sound is
as if we're saying no protest to anyone anywhere.
Um, no, I'm sub I'm submitting that it is very broad
and there's no, um, definition of what near
to a residence means or what a residence is.
Um, and I would submit that if, um, we are limited
to being unable to protest outside an embassy
where officials may live, um,
that those are often public places where it's very important
for protest to happen, um, for decision makers
to hear from the people that are being impacted
or the people that have, uh, something to say about
what is happening in Thank you, um, government policy. So
If we were to change it to make it clearer in your opinion
about what near residential premises is, would you be okay
with, with us continuing to say
that people shouldn't be able
to be disruptive in a protest in front
of a residential premises?
Would you be okay with it then on behalf of
No, I, I don't think, um, it's retrievable to say
that we shouldn't be able to protest near, um,
residential premises
because I think, um, being able to protest
where you can be seen
and heard by decision makers is very important.
And um, anything that we are doing at this point
to limit public participation in protest is a problem.
Right. I just got a question if you finish
email or not. Well,
I guess the question becomes
what we've been asking everyone
and um, you know, you're representing thousands
of people from Greenpeace, so is it okay for people
to be not allowed to pray in silence
outside of abortion clinics?
Is that okay? Or should that be allowed to pray in silence
outside of an abortion clinic?
I think that speaks, um, to the core of this.
I may not like that someone wants to protest
outside an abortion clinic or near an abortion clinic.
Um, but I think that's not the law we're discussing
and I believe that protest is important, um, regardless
of which side of the political fence you sit on.
Okay. Um, Dougan, thank
You. Um, thank
you for that submission niv.
Uh, my question to you now noting that globe
that Greenpeace is a global organization
and we heard from a previous submitter in terms of, um,
this bill being a part of a global trend
to criminalize political protest through Greenpeace.
Have you seen some of some of the chilling effects
of bills like this being introduced in other countries
that has in fact prevented protest or has criminalized
or has meant a increase in arrest?
Yeah, I think we're seeing, um, massive changes part,
particularly in the United States
and in the United Kingdom where laws
to protest have been changed.
Um, for example, the the protest laws around, um,
protesting, um, the war in, in Gaza in the UK
where people protesting
that are now breaking another law just by protesting.
Um, and I think we don't want
to set people up to break laws.
We want to enable people to protest peacefully and stand up
and have their voices heard.
And I think we can all agree that in roa, um,
we have a better, stronger civic society than in some
of those countries I've just mentioned
because we have strongly stood up
for people's right to protest.
Alright. Hey, thank you very much
for your submission this afternoon
and taking the time to join us.
Thank you. Now we've got, um, miss Pamela, uh, Greeley from,
uh, sunny town of Cor Manal.
Hopefully it's sunny up there today.
Good afternoon.
Yo, how is everyone?
Yes, it's beautifully sunny up here in the Corrum Manal.
Very good. I'm glad to hear it now
we've got five minutes with you.
Cool. Um, I'll correct straight on into it then.
So yes, I live in the beautiful, um, Corrum Manal
and I'm involved in several community
and environmental groups and I oppose this bill outright
because it represents an unnecessary
and dangerous extension to state power into areas
that are already well covered by existing law.
It claims to protect personal privacy,
but it's real effect will be to chill, lawful protest
and silence descent rights that are not privileges
but essential freedoms.
Under New Zealand's Bill of Rights Act,
the bill's unnecessary as we already have laws to deal
with harassment, trespass, intimidation, noise,
and nuisance, including the Harassment Act, the Trespass Act
and the Summary Offenses act itself.
The those laws give police the powers they need
to act when people genuinely cross the line to harassment.
This bill doesn't fill a gap, it creates new powers
to restrict public expression simply
because someone finds it inconvenient or uncomfortable.
The bill is vague
and overbroad, it criminalizes demonstrations
that cause an unreasonable disruption,
but nowhere defines what unreasonable means
which leaves enforcement to subjective judgment by police,
police neighbors, or even politicians.
A candlelight vi, a union picket a climate march,
all could be deemed unreasonable.
If someone decides they don't like the message,
criminal law must be clear and unpredictable.
This bill is neither and that opens the door to selective
or politicized enforcement depending on who is protesting
and what they're protesting about.
We don't need to imagine where this could lead.
We can look to the United Kingdom
where law laws sold common sense.
Protest controls have expanded far
beyond their original intent.
Pensioners have been arrested for holding banners.
Peaceful groups are labeled violent
or extremist without evidence.
This is what happens when governments start deciding which
protests are acceptable.
And once that power exists,
it will be inevitably used against those who challenge it.
We must not make the same mistake here.
The bill says a person commits an offense if they ought
to have known a protest might be disruptive.
That means people could be criminalized not
for their actions, but for what someone
else thinks they should have known.
It's an extraordinary step away from the normal requirement
of intent in criminal law.
It would punish people who take care to act lawfully,
but still find themselves accused
because someone was annoyed or inconvenienced.
It's also an erosion of protest rights.
Protest isn't meant to be convenient.
It exists precisely
because people sometimes feel unheard
requiring permission to protest or risk.
A risk for disruption turns free expression into something
the state allows rather than something that people possess.
That's the opposite of democracy.
A protest that doesn't challenge power,
that doesn't disrupt the status quo in some way
isn't really a protest at all.
And the chilling effect is that even the threat
of prosecution will deter ordinary people from speaking out.
That includes parents, pensioners
and community members who might
otherwise stand peacefully on a roadside with a sign
or join a local demonstration.
When citizens fear the exercising a right might get them
arrested, those rights no longer exist in practice.
This is how democratic freedoms erode, not in one big step,
but through a series of laws
that make us speaking out just a little bit hard each time.
This bill is unnecessary, overreaching
and inconsistent with both the spirit
and the letter of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act.
It does not protect privacy,
it extends state control over expression.
It does not prevent harm, it creates harm by silencing,
lawful, peaceful dissent.
The laws we already have are more than adequate
to address genuine harassment.
I therefore urge the committee
to reject this bill in its entirety.
Protecting privacy does not
require suppressing public expression.
A free and democratic society depends on the ability
of citizens to gather to dissent
and to hold power to account peacefully
but firmly, please reject this bill
and uphold the rights that make our
democracy worth defending.
Nui, thank you for your time. Any questions?
Yeah, thank you for your submission. Right.
I'm just looking at members here. Oh, oh my.
Alright, we've got one from Ms. Walter.
Um, thank you very much Pamela for your submission
and I think you're probably, um, one
of the few today who've made, made the point about creep
and where this takes us going forward,
which I do think is an issue
with some legislation in New Zealand, like the Security
and Intelligence Act,
there's an automatic review over a period
and I was just wondering what your thoughts are in terms of
how we ensure that there isn't, um, you know,
there isn't this creep
that we're actively looking at protecting the right
Protests forward.
Um, I think by rejecting this bill that would help.
Mm-hmm. Um,
certainly I think once a bill like this is in place,
the creep is almost inevitable.
It's very, very hard to put something back in its box,
which we've seen, you know, that the previous submitter
as well had the similar,
we see what's happening in the us we see what's happening in
the uk and the danger is it will happen in New Zealand if we
allow this bill to go through.
Excellent. Alright. Hey, well thank you
and enjoy your afternoon, the Corman.
Thank you. Okay.
Right now I think we've got
Katherine Arrow, is that correct?
Do you wanna see Katherine?
If you're available, we're free to hear from you.
Good afternoon, Catherine, how you going?
Kira? Good afternoon.
I think I've turned everything on, so,
No, that's good. We, we
can hear you. We've got five minutes with you.
Okay. I'm looking forward to hearing from you.
So thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today.
I'm Catherine Arrow and I'm just speaking
as an individual in New Zealand who is firmly opposed
to this summary offense's demonstrations near residential
premises amendment bill
because it represents a profound threat
to our democratic rights
and the freedoms that underpin them.
The government stated intention is to protect the privacy
of individuals at home.
Yet the real effect of this bill is
to restrict protests in ways that are vague overroad
and politically selective.
It's been introduced at a time when public participation in
our democratic processes has already been curtailed
throughout the term of this government consultation
and submission periods have been shortened,
legislation has been rushed through under urgency
and opportunities for people to engage meaningfully
with those who represent them have diminished indeed protest
activity we've seen in recent months has been born
of frustration at being shut out
of legitimate democratic channels
and shut down by our politicians.
This bill compounds the frustration
and criminalizes dissent by introducing an offense
so vaguely defined that no one can be certain
where their freedoms lie.
Terms are open to wide interpretation.
The New Zealand Law Society stated that it doubted the need
for the proposed new offense.
And when a body like that expresses concern,
parliament really should pause and listen.
The regulatory impact statement indicated that the Ministry
of Justice itself preferred a less punitive option,
yet the government rejected that advice
and chose to proceed with a harsh aversion.
That decision demonstrates political motivation rather
than legal necessity.
It also highlights the wider pattern of policymaking driven
by haste and uncomfortable optics rather than carefully
balancing rights.
Minister Goldsmith's August media release encapsulates the
inversion at the heart of this bill
and that is that protest is being framed as an intrusion.
Privacy is important,
but it's never been regarded as an absolute right
that eclipses the freedoms of expression assembly
and movement, especially when the individuals concerned a
political figures or other publicly accountable officials
even when they choose to hide from that accountability
protest has always occurred in the vicinity
of politicians' homes
and these actions, while sometimes uncomfortable,
have long been accepted as a legitimate means
of holding elected representatives
to account within a free society.
We should also acknowledge the
political double standard here.
When protests targeted our former Prime Minister Jacinda
ER's home, many
of the same voices now championing this bill,
dismiss those demonstrations as trivial.
The inconsistency is striking lord's laws, laws made
to protect some while disregarding the treatment
of others cannot be said
to uphold principle they serve power.
Legal commentators have described this as a bad law.
The law society's critique the ministry's advice civil
society submissions from groups, some
of whom have dubbed it.
An undemocratic attempt
to shield decision makers from the discomfort
of public dissent all confirm that assessment.
The government's own regulatory impact statement
and acknowledges that the number of protests
outside MP's homes remains low.
Yet this bill introduces a new criminal offense carrying up
to three months imprisonment or a $2,000 fine.
That's not a measured response to a pressing problem.
It's legislative overreach designed
to silence the voice of the people.
This bill would deter ordinary people from
legitimate, peaceful protest.
It hands discretionary power to police officers who have
to then decide what constitutes unreasonable disruption,
risking arbitrary enforcement
and selective prosecution, it privileges the comfort
of those in authority over the conscience
of those they represent chair and members.
Democracies not designed for the comfort of the powerful.
It's built on the capacity of people to speak, assemble,
and protest even when that protest is inconvenient.
If we begin to criminalize discomfort,
we erode accountability.
I therefore urge this committee to recommend
that the bill not proceed if there is a genuine problem
of harassment or intimidation.
Existing laws already provide many remedies.
Creating a new ill-defined criminal offense is unnecessary,
disproportionate and dangerous.
Particularly at a time when trust in democratic institutions
is fragile, this bill sends the wrong message.
It tells people that their voices are a
nuisance, not a right.
I ask you to instead to affirm that protest debate
and participation are not intrusions,
but essential acts of democracy.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, any questions?
Can I just ask this, um, issue about nearness
and that's it, it's covered in your submission.
It's a people saying they want absolute clarity around it,
but isn't it, isn't it better to leave it somewhat
with some, uh, flexibility?
Because for instance, if someone was protesting right
outside your house, but in a silent manner
and just doing a um, just a simple protest
with maybe a car park with a sign on nearness in
that perspective or in
that situation is would probably be not an issue at all.
But if it's a loud banging, noisy thing that's been going on
for, uh, 12 hours
and it's at four o'clock in the morning,
nearness might then dictate that
during those late hours it shouldn't be anywhere near a
re residential property given that there might be, um,
children involved, whatever.
So why do you, are you suggesting in your submission,
do you think that if we were to proceed with this and try
and give more clarity, what, what would you do to, uh,
better define nearness?
Because it really relates to the situation, doesn't it?
I think that the right to protest peacefully,
whether it happens in the day
or it happens in the night, is something
that people should be allowed to participate in.
If there is a great deal of noise
that's upsetting the locality,
then I'm sure no noise control
would've something to say about it.
There's an existing law for that.
If there are other difficulties, there are existing laws,
but whether it's day or night, if we have a reason
to protest, then people should be allowed to do so.
It's as simple as that.
Okay. Alright. Hey, thank you for your,
um, contribution Miss Arrow.
That's, um, very nice to have you with us today.
Right now we're going to, I think it's Gabriela, is it?
We're going back. Are we? No.
Going forward, forward jumping the page. Oh, here we are.
Um, Gabriela, um,
brain is it I think is that right?
Brain from, uh, how you going
afternoon now we've got five minutes with you.
Koto, um, called Gabriela Brain.
Um, just in terms of, yeah, ua,
I'm a junior lawyer working in Koro.
I'm not a legal expert,
but I am a practitioner who has been involved in various,
um, community organizing and protest COPA over the years.
So that's the lend I bring to this today.
Um, clearly I do not support the summary offenses amendment
bill and ask
that the select committee recommended its abandonment
as an alarming restriction on protesting, particularly
as people are being increasingly mobilized to protest, um,
you know, against some of the worst human rights atrocities
that we've seen in our lifetimes.
Now the bills explanatory note close itself
with reference to, um, article 17
of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
And I'm not too sure, I assume a few of the, um,
submitters today have gone into some detail around this.
But the covenant is an obligation placed on states to uphold
and protect fundamental human rights.
And so NZ Bora is our domestic human rights framework
that affirms New Zealand's commitment
to the international covenant as a state.
Now the rights of privacy itself is not explicitly asserted
as its own distinct right.
In New Zealand Bora.
And in thinking back to the actual covenant, um,
the actual wording of Article 17 is
to protect people from unlawful
and arbitrary interference with their privacy.
Um, this is not a blanket right to privacy period.
Um, the key words are unlawful and arbitrary.
So in an interpersonal setting, um, you know,
obviously committing harmful, dangerous
and unreasonable acts against someone's privacy
and safety, um, is already largely captured
by our current criminal laws.
And, you know, I do give credit
to the recent anti stalking legislation, um, that, you know,
seeks to strengthen legal protections around stalking
and harassment in New Zealand.
However, like coming back
to this article 17, right to privacy.
Um, this is ultimately a right domestically so far as
to protect people from unlawful
and arbitrary interferences on their privacy
and safety by the state.
You know, for example, um,
to protect people against unlawful state surveillance.
And that's more clearly captured by other arms of NZ Bora.
But more importantly, in terms of what
this bill strikes at waving
around Article 17 should never be used as a justification
for the casserole erosion of other human rights upheld
by the state, you know, such as the right to freedom
of expression, peaceful assembly association
and movement, um, protesting essentially, which is exactly
what this bill does.
It grants the police further discretionary powers
to crack down on protest
and is fundamentally a deterrent against targeted
and disruptive protesting,
but also for the general public protesting as a whole.
Um, the bill does not serve a practical lawmaking purpose
or commitment to, um,
international human rights instruments.
Rather, um, you know, as I submit today,
it upholds more nefarious aims in a global landscape
of rising 21st century authoritarianism where the right
to protest is being eroded.
Um, you know, and as more
and more people are mobilizing to protest,
sometimes disruptively, um,
but ultimately to raise awareness against growing
human rights abuses.
And so in the two, sorry, the past two years
have been marked by unprecedented levels of protesting
and community organizing against the government's rollback
of te and workers rights on home soils as well
as complicity in the genocide of Palestinians abroad.
Some of these protest actions have been deliberately
disruptive, yet peaceful as a way to draw attention
to the sheer depravity of the political situation
that we are dealing with.
So therefore, the proposal
of this bill is a further restriction
on the right to protest.
Um, as more
and more New Zealanders have been taking to the streets
to defend these attacks on fundamental human rights mirrors
an alarming trend of rising authoritarianism globally.
And, um, that's why I submit
that this bill should be scrapped.
Okay, thank you very much.
I've got one question from, uh, Ms. Cle
Gabriela Gabriela, this, um, the last year we saw one
of the largest protests, um, in our history, um,
on the doors of Parliament.
And it was beautiful in, in the sense that yep,
it was peaceful and I didn't hear anyone from our government
go and say they shouldn't be allowed to protest
what, what you are saying.
And, and I and I thank you for coming online
and you are young and you've got a long future ahead of you,
but I feel you are saying that as if this bill saying
that people shouldn't be allowed
to be disruptive in protest in front of people's homes.
If we really narrow it down to what it is, Gabriela,
as if it's gonna have this, um, domino effect when,
where we are saying no one's allowed to protest ever.
I'd ask you please to rethink that, that proposition
because we weren't against people
exercising their rights to protest.
What we're saying here is being disruptive in protest in
front of people's homes, whether it's a politician
or a person that is catching fish to ma
to sell at the fish market.
Okay. Alright. Yeah, if I can just respond to that.
Um, Kiara, um, first of all, the way
that this bill has been written is incredibly vague.
Um, the language, the elemental sort
of tests in terms of establishing whether an offense, um, is
prosecutable, leaves far too much up to interpretation, um,
for the police to essentially
apply their discretionary powers, um,
within the context of protests.
Also, I hear what you are saying about, um, you know,
protecting people in their own homes.
Again, my submission is that we already have
a criminal law framework in place
that does protect people's privacy,
that does protect people's safety.
What this bill is essentially getting at is a restriction
on the fundamental rights to protest.
And that's a right
that is enshrined within our human rights
framework in New Zealand.
And anything that
erodes away at those fundamental human rights, um,
should be incredibly alarming to this,
this entire committee.
Um, so I, I hear what you're saying in terms of, you know,
asking me to go back and reflect,
but actually my submission is for the select committee
as a concerned member of, of the public
as somebody who's been involved in community organizing
as somebody, um, you know, who practices as a lawyer
in the criminal defense space is that this bill is yeah,
represents a dangerous erosion of fundamental human rights
and the importance of freedom of expression, the right
to protest as a cornerstone of a functioning democracy.
Alright, I've just got one. Fantastic.
So I, well put,
I've just got one more question from Mr. Stevenson.
Yeah, mine's probably just thanks for your submission.
Mine's probably just a question of clarification
'cause I just wanna make sure we're not left
with the wrong impression.
Uh, 'cause it could be inferred from what you said
that this, you think this bill is some part of some kind of,
um, global trend
or a global, I don't wanna use the word conspiracy,
but, um, global, well coordinated effort to
suppress protest it.
That's not what you're saying though, is it?
Well, it's not a conspiracy,
but mapping how things are politically at the moment.
If we look to the United Kingdom, particularly in terms
of the, the rollout of fresh legislation designed
to crack down on protesting, particularly as you know,
protesting has erupted.
Um, you know, thinking of the genocide in Gaza
as an example in the ways in which laws have been, um,
you know, brought into that context to
suppress people's fundamental rights to protest,
particularly against some
of the worst human rights atrocities
that we've seen in our generation.
If you look over to the United States, again,
the same terrifying things are happening.
People are speaking out against human rights,
rollbacks and atrocities.
And you have, you know, the Trump administration, um,
threatening to declare Antifa as a terrorist organization,
a foreign terrorist organization.
Now Antifa is not a coordinated movement.
It doesn't have any, you know, like formed
structure or organizing model.
It simply is an abbreviation of anti-fascism. Mm-hmm.
Okay. Right. Alright. Hey, thank you for your submission.
Uh, we've gone well over time, but, um, nice to talk to you
and thank you for coming on this afternoon.
Cool. Thank you for your time as well. Koto.
Yeah. Who we got Justice, Uh,
Palestine, uh, we're going back.
So justice for Palestine, we've got Ms. Kate Stone, I think.
There we are. Nice to see you.
We've got 10 minutes with you
and we've got colleague as well.
I see
Kilda. Yeah, Kilda,
KTO, um, called Kate Stone in
E Tam here.
Um, the Justice for Palestine.
My name's Kate Stone, I'm based up in Soki
and I am a volunteer cove of justice for Palestine.
Um, and I'm appearing with, uh, justice
for Palestine member Marsala Rodriguez.
Re marsala, did you wanna just introduce yourself,
Uh, uh, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee? Yes.
My name's Marsala Rodriguez Re I'm an associate professor
of law at Auckland University,
Gilda. Um,
so as, as we note in our submission, justice
of Palestine is an incorporated society.
Um, we're voluntary based
and, um, we, uh, working to advocate for Palestine
Ando and we, um, we take a human rights based approach
to our advocacy and our group doesn't tolerate any forms
of racism, discrimination, um, in
how we conduct ourselves
and how those who attend our actions conduct themselves.
Uh, the, the basis of our submission is
that this bill is neither necessary
nor effective in achieving the stated objectives
of the bill, um,
or addressing the wider fundamental issue
of political violence and intimidation.
It's not necessary because there are already
offenses to deal with.
Um, the kinds of behaviors that are
of concern to the in this bill.
Um, the types of things that, uh,
we are trying to get at here could be managed in other ways
other than through criminalization.
Um, and a recent IPCA report indicates that other,
other things that need to be addressed in terms
of the police's ability to deal with, with protests.
So we also say that, um,
this bill isn't effective at addressing that wider issue,
um, that wider issue of political violence and intimidation
and, um, it misses the real problem, um,
at the heart of those issues.
And, and in our submission in particular, we make the point
that a, a lot of the harm that's done in terms of um,
political intimidation isn't actually
happening in front of people's houses.
It's happening online, um, and in other, in other places.
And we are concerned that a, a move like this,
aside from not being necessary and
and encroaching on human rights, um,
also derail delay any, um, actual, uh, work
to, to address those fundamental issues.
So, um, I guess in terms of this point about, um,
limiting fundamental human rights,
we're concerned about the lack of precision in the bill as,
as I understand the previous ER was as well.
Um, that lack of precision around certain definitions,
which we, um, address in the submission will create
uncertainty overly broad, ambiguous.
And that's really concerning when we are talking about
limiting fundamental rights.
Um, that lack of precision is likely
to have an even greater chilling effect
because people won't know where the line is
and what what is permitted and what's not.
Um, and,
and another point we make in our submission is that, um,
protests are intended to create disorder and disruption.
That's the point of protest.
And, um, just as we, we might not necessarily agree
with the strategy or tactics of every other group
that advocates for Palestinian rights or or other kopa, um,
but we think it's important that we have that latitude
to create disruption in our society in order
to advance things that are fundamental to that society.
So where, um, I think as the last was talking about
where we are seeing, um, people being, uh,
genocided on the other side of the world, um,
many people in New Zealand think
that life shouldn't just continue
as usual when that's happening.
And that, that there is a cause a justified
cause for disruption.
Um, and, and those are the kinds of rights
that we think should be protected.
Um, so if
we are limiting core rights
and the right to protest, which are critical
to our democracy, we need to be clear about
what they're trying to achieve
and that the means that we're using
to achieve them will actually achieve them.
Otherwise, uh, we don't consider that that can be justified.
Um, Marlo, I just, I'll leave it there and hand over to you.
Got it, Kate? Yeah, just to, to talk
what Peter has just said.
There's also a risk, I think with the vagueness
of the proposed legislation, um, not really being able
to survive any scrutiny in a Bill
of rights context once it makes its way into the courts,
creating a standard of reasonableness is
open to interpretation.
Uh, and my personal opinion on the, the text of the bill,
uh, I don't think that it would cover the very protest
that created this problem in the first
place, which was that if Mr.
Brooker in front of a gray mouth police officer's resonance,
uh, would be unclear as to whether
or not that would amount to sort of the offending behavior
that the bill seeks to sort of erase.
And as a result, it's unclear as to whether
or not it's going to achieve any of the problems
that the bill vaguely tries
to set out to achieve, to address.
And I'll just sort of emphasize that point,
that the police themselves, uh,
through the IPCA report earlier this year have said
that they're on a vacuum need,
standalone regulatory guidance.
And this piece of legislation doesn't enter anything of
that, uh, time whatsoever.
It doesn't provide any guidance to police, uh,
at all in terms of how they should police,
and that's why the Ministry
of Justice recommended themselves
that a much more preferable way of dealing
with things would be allowed for, uh,
an offensive continuing disturbance,
requiring a police warning
before any sort of offense was actually made out.
So, as Kate has suggested, uh, the, the problem
that this is trying to address is unclear.
It's certainly not the most pressing problem, uh,
that we've got with regards to sort of political protest,
uh, in at the moment.
Uh, and certainly it's unclear as to whether
or not it's even going to be effective
in addressing those problems.
We're open to your questions. Thank you.
Right. Thank you for your submissions.
I've got one from Ms. Walter.
Um, thank you very much for your submission.
Just on that last point about continuing disturbance,
is your view that that would be, um, a useful way
to draw the line, or am I correct that
that would still not be, um, a reasonable limitation
of the right to protest in your view?
Thank you, Ms. Walters. Uh, look, in our submission, uh,
we, we note that we don't think that it's a,
a preferable outcome.
We think the bill should be rejected in its entirety,
but we do think that that would be a better way
of balancing the, the rights at issue with the right
to privacy as the Ministry of Justice has identified.
And it's concerning, uh,
that the government rejected the Ministry
of Justice's view in that regard.
There you go. Um, thank you. I've just got another one.
And I'd like your comment on a, an issue I raised earlier,
which is the collective Actus race problem.
Um, and just in terms of large gatherings, what's your view
of how easy it is for people to understand what's happening,
you know, a few people away from them
and to leave the situation if they, um, wanted to?
Kate, if you don't mind, um, look,
this was literally an exam problem that I said earlier,
just year about what happens to bystanders
that come through a large protest.
This happens to be in front of a residential process.
There's, there's massive sort of overreach concerns here,
and it would be very, very difficult for police to sort
of identify particular protestors as to whether
or not they were actively participating contributed
to both the actors race, um,
and the means, right, that would be required, um,
in this particular sort of, um, offense.
And that's a big concern that allows
for potential police overreach, uh, a lack of clarity, the,
the very thing the police have been crying
out for in this sector.
Thank you. Okay. I've got a question from Dr. Nan.
Thank you, chair. Um, thank you for that.
Uh, Marcello, I think just the other thing
that I've noted is you mentioned Brooklyn Police,
and we've also men, uh, heard other submitters mentioning
Brooklyn Police and more than police, I wondered in terms of
those, uh, Supreme Court rulings under the current
legislation, I wondered if you have any inkling
or advice, not to say that, you know,
how Supreme Court would rule,
but whether this is going to have the likelihood
of potentially being challenged in the
highest court as well.
Uh, thank you, Dr. Zon.
That's, that's a really sort of good point.
And if I knew what the Supreme Court was saying,
I'd be in a, a much higher position
than I, than I am right now.
But I, I, I think that this would be at risk
of challenge at the moment.
It doesn't balance the rights, uh,
that have breached the moment with the,
the right to privacy appropriately.
The Ministry of Justice has identified that,
and that just makes it a very risky piece of legislation
to put before un uh, the courts untested.
I think, as I say, that, that standard
of reasonableness will either be read down significantly,
um, or I think as you sort of identify
that there's a real risk that that misbalance that the act,
uh, proposes, uh, means that it would be difficult
for the courts to sort of reconcile.
Um, and, and as a result, I, I think it would be likely
to challenge and likely to be at the very least watered down
in, in each core challenge.
Just one very quick sub, um, this is something that, uh,
Venu wrote as you, you suggested
before with another, um, submitter, is
what do you think in terms of a review
clause for something like this?
Because of the fact
that things like this have not been tested in action,
As in sort of the, the legislation would be reviewed
after a certain period of time, sunset
Or sunset clause? Yeah. Yeah.
Well, at the very least I
think that that would be appropriate.
But I, I think I just sort of go back
to our sort of original point.
This is just a, a very sort of piecemeal way of dealing
with a much larger problem, with a lack of sort of guidance
to both police protestors
and, uh, a regulation of the entire sector
and should be rejected in its entirety as a result.
So that's an easy statement to make and,
and you're just fine saying it,
but if you were drafting it, you know, we've heard issues
around what is the definition of closeness
and what's the targeted, um, protests
and what are the, all these different terms mean?
You've got to, you've gotta give the police some
discretion, right?
'cause they're the people who will be
enforcing it, the front line.
As a associate professor, how would, how would you draft it?
Because I've made the point before,
and I'm sure you've been listening, that if it's a,
a silent protest with a car outside your front door,
that's not, probably not deemed
to be offensive, I hear that.
But it is, if there's a, um, a very loud, noisy protest
that is, uh, going on for a long time, that could be deemed
to be very offensive.
So how would you go about defining these things if you
wanted greater clarity around it?
Well, Mr. Bailey, with respect,
I wouldn't draft this bill in the first place.
I, I do what the police have asked for, um,
for an entire sort of standalone piece of legislation
and entire regulatory scheme that properly deals
with those sort of very difficult questions.
Presently, the vagueness
and imprecision of the bill is, is a very poor way
of dealing with one subset of a much larger suite
of problems with regards to the right of protest.
So, you know, I'm not a legislative drafter,
but I would follow the recommendations
of the IPCA here in really sort of thinking about
how an entirely legislative scheme would actually
deal with these processes.
Okay. Alright. Hey, thank you, uh, very much for both
of you for your time this afternoon.
It's been, uh, very good to hear from you. Thank you. Right.
We're gonna move on. Um, Omar, we've got,
uh, I'm not gonna attempt your surname,
but I'm not sure being rude, but I don't wanna get it wrong.
But Omar, if you're there,
a good afternoon.
Good afternoon. Hi.
Very good. We've got, um, five minutes and,
and maybe you can say your full name
because, uh, I think all of us be interested to know
how you pronounce it, but, uh,
be looking forward to hearing from you.
Okay. Uh, my name is Omari.
I'm, uh, part of the, uh, the community just, uh,
reading about this build, and I have just an opinion.
Uh, if I can read it for you, I've prepared it,
or if you want to ask me
No, no. Read, read through.
Just feel free
to use the time as you want.
Okay. Just let,
my name is Omari
and I'm speaking as a community member who deeply values
both freedom of expression
and the right of people to feel safe in their homes.
First, I want to acknowledge the intent behind this bill.
Some demonstrations when directed at private citizens can
indeed become intimidating.
Everyone deserves peace and dignity at home,
but this bill goes far beyond that purpose.
At risk silencing legitimate democratic expressions,
the kind that keeps our leaders accountable,
the term targeted and unreasonable disruption are vague.
What seems unreasonable
to one person could be the only peaceful way
another can hear.
Without clear definitions,
the law could be applied inconsistently or politically
and suppressed voices that simply makes those
power uncomfortable.
A small, respectful group holding signs
outside the minister's home could still be criminalized,
that would discourage participation
and weaken democracy itself.
New Zealand already has laws covering harassment,
intimidation, and noises, the harassment Act 1997,
the Summary Offense Act.
This bill, instead of targeting harm risks
starting expression, it's not closing a legal gap,
it's widening state control over protest.
Freedom of expression is protected under Section 14
of the Bill of Rights Act and privacy in one's world.
Under Section 21,
this pillar risks tipping that balance too far,
prioritizing comfort over accountability.
Democracy is not meant to be convenient.
It's meant to be peaceful, responsible,
and open even when it is uncomfortable.
Actually, politicians and public officials are not private
citizens in the same sense as others,
as myself or any other.
They are public figures.
And with that comes both privilege and responsibility.
We recently saw the inside Parliament when Ms.
Culley said, we need members with a spine.
She was suspended for a week for refusing to apologize.
Yet the following week ended
tens of thousands of New Zealand in all streets
and squares of New Zealand echoed her words,
we need members with a spine.
This should be heard, the people were united,
but parliament did not seem to hear them.
If the public voice is not welcome inside the house
and is restricted outside, it's then
where can people be heard?
Most citizens can't easily meet ministers
or walk into parliament when letters
and emails go unanswered.
Peaceful demonstrations outside a politician's whom
become one of the few visible way to say, listen to us.
That's not harassment, that's democracy.
And let me be clear.
I don't support aggression threats or cars,
but I do support the right of citizens to demonstrate
peacefully even outside the homes of politicians
and decision makers.
Public figures have chosen roles of accountability.
Their homes should not be placed of fear,
but neither should they be untouchable spaces
beyond public visibility.
A peaceful protest is not a crime.
It is a form of political speech protected
by both law and consciousness.
This bill as written, would criminalize
that form of protest.
It would turn moral expression into an offense.
And that is a dangerous precedent for our democracy.
Let's not to forget that history shows how easily freedom
canero both Mussolini
and Hitler came democratic elections
then Bill, after bill restriction,
after restriction, the space for decent disappeared
until democracy became dictatorship.
They became fascist and Nazi.
Every generation must defend not only the right to vote,
but the right to speak, to protest, and to disagree.
When governments begin criminalizing peaceful expression,
even with good intentions,
they take the first quiet step down that same path.
It's scary to find ourselves going in that footstep.
So actually, let's define clearly what targeted
and unreasonable disruption mean
using measureable criteria such as distance, duration, noise
is distinguished between private
residents and public officials.
Only private citizens should fall under this restriction
guarantee simplicity.
That peaceful protest remains lawful.
Even near the homes of elected representatives
require warning before prosecution
and include a two year review clause to prevent mis.
In conclusion, I support
protecting people from harassment at home,
but I oppose criminalizing peaceful demonstrations
near the hopes of politicians.
Public accountability does not stop at
the steps of parliament.
A healthy democracy protects both the privacy of the few
and the voice of the many with clear safeguards.
Okay, and moral courage. Yeah,
We're getting pretty close to time. Yeah.
Okay. With clear safeguards
and moral courage, we can protect both
and keep roa a place where people feel safe.
And here, NAMI here,
and thank you for the opportunity to speak
And thank you for, um, your contribution this afternoon.
That's been an excellent contribution. We got any questions?
I think we're okay.
Hey, thank you, uh, very much
for joining us this afternoon from, um, wherever you are.
All right. Cheers for that. Now, who
In a Oh, in Auckland.
Okay.
The next one is canceled
and we don't have anybody to talk unless Steve, for 20
Minutes. Okay.
So members, we're gonna have a slight break.
Um, I'm gonna suggest we resume at two 30.
Um, so we, I'm gonna call her AUR just for until two 30.
Alright? Okay. Thank you
Ra.
Diora, how are You? Ra Thank you.
Are you able to hear me okay?
Very loudly and very good, thank you.
Oh, are you on your own? Are you on your own?
I am, I am on my own. Stay.
Okay, Lisa, that's cool. We've got two minutes with you.
Thank you. Well, Kura, I'm Lisa Woods from Amnesty
and thank you for the opportunity to submit this afternoon.
I'm actually submitting you submitting to you today from
outside Premier House.
Oh. And this is one of the sites
that we are really worried could potentially be criminalized
by some process protest under this bill.
So at Amnesty, what we are calling
for is this bill to be halted.
I want to recognize that ensuring the privacy
and enjoyment of homes is a really important policy issue
and something that I think we agreed agency
should be a priority.
But we believe this bill is fundamentally flawed
and we recommend haling this bill
and working to explore what the problems are, the scope
and extent in a way that upholds human rights.
I also note that the regulatory impact statement noted
that consultations should have occurred given the
significant rights engaged,
and that there was limited information about the size
and scale of the problem.
The things that we, the you've seen,
our submission we outlined are concerns
and then excluded things such as that.
We thought the bill was vague.
So for example, what counts as near a residence?
I note that the bill, uh, tends
to contain some guidance on that.
But again, we thought that was very vague and subjective.
We note that as the bill is currently worded,
it would include important sites of protest, such
as Premier House, such as embassies.
Where there is a residence.
Not only is the vague and how it would apply,
but it doesn't, it also doesn't include a warning system
prior to criminalizing an individual for protest.
We strongly recommend to the committee that you go back
and talk with people detected, uh,
and hear from experts in terms of what is the scope
of the problem, and figure out what solutions could be
that uphold human rights if the book were to go ahead,
which we strongly recommend not doing
and really taking the time to work through the issues.
But if it were to go ahead,
there are some fundamental things
that we think should absolutely change.
And that includes, uh, the introduction of a warning system,
fixing the, the incredible, uh, quite vague, uh, uh,
contents in the bill.
And as well carving out exceptions from important rights of,
uh, places of protest such as embassies, uh,
and places like Premier House.
Uh, thank you to the committee, uh, for this time to submit.
Very good, Lisa. And I've gotta say your
submission was good.
Um, now I think we've got Ms. Walters.
Um, thank you Lisa, for your submission.
Um, just as an international organization,
and I know your Secretary General has been here recently,
what can you tell us about, um, the right
to protest internationally
and what we're seeing in terms of trends
and legislative steps
that some governments are putting into place?
Yeah. Well actually I was actually having,
over the last couple of weeks, I've been talking to a number
of activists overseas
where there are different regimes regulating protest, some
of which are similar to what we were seeing
being introduced here.
And the problem that people are saying is that it's so open
to being misused in a way that is really going
to undermine fundamental rights to protest
and civil society.
And at a time when we are seeing authoritarian creep
overseas, I think the right to protest,
it's just more important than ever.
And one of the things we are thinking about
when we are making laws, it's just not
how this would be applied tomorrow,
but how could it be applied in five years, 10 years,
and 15 years with a, with a different type of government.
And so our concern with this type of law, particularly one
that is so vague, is it could be so open to misuse.
Okay. Right. Any other questions?
Do anyone else wanted any questions? Okay.
Hey, thank you Lisa. It looks wonderful
where you are right now.
We are stuck in parliament, but anyway,
Thank you very much.
All right, fantastic. Thank you. Have a nice afternoon.
Bye-bye right now.
Um, we're still waiting for him to come on.
We don't have anybody on. Okay.
We're just waiting about here, ladies
and gentleman, to elevate her music,
we do go into private and do the petition.
You wanna go, we could go into private for five
or 10 minutes and go off.
Okay. Should we do that? Mm-hmm. Okay.
Yeah. Members, we might just go into private session.
We're just waiting to get a few people to join up.
So if we just go, you'll have
to zoom in if you're obviously zooming in, uh,
under the private thing.
But we'll just try and deal with that for about 10 minutes.
So we've got, um, five minutes with you.
Looking forward to hearing from you.
Thank you.
Um, uh, Isabel.
Now, KTA, when I was writing my submission, the main part I
that came to mind was who does this law actually protect
who isn't already protected?
The balance between privacy, home, life,
and de democratic participation is delicate.
While it is entirely reasonable
to protect people from the intimidation
or harassment at their of their homes,
the way this bill is drafted is vague overroad
and risks targeting already vulnerable voices
all while adding no real rules that don't already exist.
I wanted to mention the summary Offenses Act of 1981.
Section three, disorderly behavior
where it already makes it an offense
to behave in a threatening insultingly, insulting
or disorderly way, but the penalty of up
to three months imprisonment.
Section 21 intimidation covers behavior such as threatening,
following, or loitering near someone's house, as well
as the Trespass Act of 1980.
It protects, protects against unauthorized entry
or presence on private property taken together.
These laws are already addressing the very conduct
that this bill aims to target
making the government's proposal seem redundant.
As Paul Ol Chief Executive of Rights Ofo Estates,
this bill represents a disproportionate
and unjustified interference with fundamental freedoms
of expression and peaceful assembly.
Now, those who rely on protests
to have their voices heard are often marginalized
communities already struggling to be listened to.
They are the real targets of this bill.
An attack of, of freedom, of on our freedom
of speech should not be a governmental focus.
This law wouldn't change the consequences
that genuine law breakers already face.
It simply seeks to extend state control
and limit our de democratic rights.
Professor Chris Guild Hill from a
a UT Law School, sorry, highlights
that this builds is vague and he has many examples.
I just wanted to include two here where he says,
say someone is concerned about the alcohol sales in an area.
Would a protest outside the shops
with a manager lives upstairs now be criminal
because the address was mainly used as a residence?
Or how about the protest against a corporate farm
that is allowing a dairy herd
to make the local hour uns swimmable?
If a protest took place at the river bordering the farm
where the workers lived, would that be illegal?
Now these examples show how unclear
and far reaching this bill could be.
There are serious gaps
and concerns in how it has been written,
and I genuinely wonder why this is a governmental priority
when Maori rights continue to be infringed upon the cost
of living deepens and the genocide in Palestine persists.
These are the issues that we as the public are focused on.
However, this bill covers nothing that majority of Tua
or TGA Titi are concerned about.
It is to diminish our rights
during a time whether are bigger problems
that we are experiencing, instead of addressing real
and pressing issues, people ofa are facing.
This bill just seems be draft to silence public voices
to stifle not solve.
Now our freedom of right, our freedom
of speech is important.
And there are already laws that cover the behavior
that this bill is aimed at.
It targets minority groups and the rights of people ofor.
It is poorly written
and I see no reason for it to be passed
toity free Palestine.
Thank you.
Hey, thank you, um, Isabella, that's, uh,
a good submission, right?
Any members got any questions for
No, I'm just looking around.
Okay. Hey, thank you
for joining us this afternoon for your submission.
No, you, I appreciate that. Right now we are going to,
We're going to Jet J
uh, alright, Jeong, uh,
are you available by Zoom?
Hopefully,
Hold On. Hello?
Hello. Nice to see you this afternoon.
Now we've got five minutes with you.
Um, looking forward to hearing what you say,
KDA. Uh,
my name is Yetta de Young.
I grew up on a dairy farm in, in the Hoki District.
I spent most of my adult life in Tamaki, Makoto, Auckland,
and now live in WaPo, Northland.
My parents were Dutch immigrants to UA in 1951 and 61.
Both were young people during World War ii.
My mother and her brother nearly starved
to death when food supplies were interrupted to her city.
And my father and his brothers were taken
to a forced labor camp in Germany where they were subjected
to brutal treatment.
I oppose the spill in general,
but particularly in its current form, I'm very concerned
that its intention is less about protecting the privacy
of individuals who may be the target of demonstrations
and more about limiting ordinary citizens' rights
to peaceful protest and demonstration,
or at least creating an environment
where many people are afraid to assert these rights
and speak out for fear of legal repercussions.
I understand this is known as a chilling effect to me.
It's an example of the kinds of small incremental changes
implemented in pre-World War II Germany
that eventually resulted in the authoritarian
dictatorship led by Hitler.
And it alarms me to see this kind
of creep happening in 21st century alor.
One of the first things Hitler did when he came
to power was put in restrictions around protesting
and demonstrations, which was quickly followed
by them being banned altogether.
The policy statement for this bill says, the objective is
to ensure that the law appropriately balances a person's
right to privacy and peaceful enjoyment of their home.
With the rights and freedoms of Fern by the New Zealand Bill
of Rights, rights Act 1990, particularly those
that protect the public's ability to protest
from reading the regulatory impact statement
and commentary from a number of other reputable sources,
it seems that this bill has been thrown here hurriedly
with almost no consultation to address an issue
that does not appear to be a real problem.
This is what leads me to worry
that it is more about restricting the public's right
to protest than about protecting those who are the target.
I am concerned that cabinet has ignored the preferred option
of the ministry in the regulatory impact statement,
which recommends that prosecution
and criminal liability only be pursued if a person continues
to participate in a disruptive protest
after a warning is issued.
Instead, this bill proposes
that criminal liability be instant decided
by the police on the basis that a person knows
or ought to know a protest
near any residential premises is causing unreasonable
disruption without properly defining what is meant
by near residential premises or unreasonable disruption.
What is the point of having a regulatory impact statement
and asking for recommendations if you just ignore them?
I have on my, on occasions
during my life being involved in demonstrations to support
or highlight causes important to me.
On, on all of those occasions,
the demonstrations have been peaceful and law abiding.
However, there has certainly been some level of disruption,
whether it be noise
or temporary blockages to the road footpath or other areas.
After all, that is the intent of a protest
to disrupt in order to draw attention to an issue.
On all of these occasions,
the demonstrations have also been near private residences,
at least for some of the time.
Did I know who lived there? No.
Could there have been people there
who might have felt targeted?
Possibly. Could a police officer have arrested me on the
basis that I ought to have known?
Probably would I have participated
if I had thought there was a possibility of being arrested,
prosecuted, fined, or even imprisoned without warning?
What do you think?
Where is the fairness and balance in that
I'm not a conspiracy theorist, an extremist or an activist.
I am just a law abiding New Zealander
who is very concerned at this erosion of our rights.
It might seem like a small thing,
but if we let this go, what will be next?
If it really is the government's intention
to strike a balance,
then at very least any new law governing protest action
should include the requirement for police to issue a warning
before making criminals out
of ordinary people exercising their freedom to speak out.
I really hope you prove me wrong in my concerns
and refuse to introduce this bill in its current form.
Thank you very much. Now I've got a question
from Celia Wade Brown,
Thank you for your submission.
So would you agree with the Amnesty International submission
that says that this is vague
and would potentially, um, criminalize things
that are traditionally not considered criminal?
Yes, I do agree with that.
Alright. And now I've got a question from, uh, Ms. Nale.
Hi Yeti. Uh, so, um,
can I ask you a question in terms of, uh,
protesting in front of people's homes are,
do you feel it's okay for people to bang pots
and pans at 4:00 AM in the morning in front
of people's homes as a form of protest?
No. Okay.
But that, but that is not, um, there are other laws
that will cover that.
Okay. And we Don't mean this law to, to,
to prevent people from doing that.
That's, that's a, a noise control issue if nothing else.
Uh, well, what I've found in my short time in Parliament
is that sometimes we, uh, create different offenses
to be more, uh, speci specific about what we are trying
to stop in a situation.
But can I also ask you to clarify in the opening remarks,
um, that you made, did I understand you correctly when you
were likening this change to, um, Nazi Germany?
Yes. Wow. But you are not extreme.
It's a, it's, it's a, it's a small incremental change.
That's just the sort of thing that happens in, in countries
that have ended up, you know, turning into dictatorships.
So my supplementary, if you don't mind, Mr. Chair, just
Last one. Last one.
Yeah. So, so yi from my perspective,
it's about not necessarily protecting,
just if you guys wanna put it as the politicians.
What about their little children from this type of behavior?
Is that, is that Nazi Germany? Like?
No, uh, it's, it's about striking a balance.
And I mean, I have had my children on some of the protests
and demonstrations I've been on
and, you know, I've always conducted myself peacefully
and I would hate to think that I would not be able to do
that and not feel safe to do that
because I would worry about being arrested and convicted.
Alright, thank you very much
for your submissions this afternoon.
Oversized and hot up north.
Thank You. Yeah, very good. Thank you.
Right now where are we going now?
Got local, local government. We've got local government.
Oh yes, we have. Right?
We've got Scott from local government, um, New Zealand.
Yes. So good afternoon. Scott Nicklin here.
Interim CE at local Government New Zealand.
And I'm also joined online, I think
by Mia Tanya Tapsell of rot.
Nice to see you worship.
Um, thanks for the opportunity to speak today.
I'll just make a few introductory comments
and then I will pass to, uh, mayor Tanya.
Uh, just look at the outset, obviously just want to stress
that we want to get the balance between freedom of speech
and people's rights to privacy.
I think it's a really important balance.
Um, we don't want to deter people for running for office
and serving their communities.
And so we are in support of the bill
and you'll have our submission, uh, there in front of you.
Um, we did appear at the committee, uh,
last year when we talked about the anti
stalking legislation.
Since then, we have only seen an increase in unacceptable
behavior against elected members.
Um, in 2024, we ran a poll of mayors, chairs
and CES that were attending one of our events.
And a third of respondents said that they had been subject
to abuse and aggression that had happened.
Uh, you know, during everyday activities like shopping
or collecting children from school,
39% said it happened at community events.
Uh, further 53 said that the aggressive abusive
and offensive behavior was worse than a year ago.
That was in 2024.
We know from this last election over the last two months as,
uh, candidates have been running for local council, um,
they've told us that actually the abuse, uh,
that they have been subjected to is the worst in memory, um,
in terms of the standard and behavior of abuse.
Um, so we really want to ensure that there are protection,
uh, and protection of families
and also the right to, uh, privacy, um,
people across local government, uh, and,
and people that serve office,
and you'll appreciate this as well, um, are subject
to those threats on a regular basis.
People, obviously in local government as you are yourselves,
your visible and you're out in your communities.
Local government, obviously councilors, mayors, et cetera,
and they're in the communities every day
and are subject to this abuse.
So we think having some protection for them, uh,
is valid and reasonable.
Uh, as I says at the outset, we want to ensure
that there's a balance between freedom of speech
and obviously people's right to privacy.
Um, we are currently running an elected member induction
programs across the country.
Uh, we've got 11 of those events
and we had the mayor's induction, uh,
two weeks ago here in Wellington.
Uh, one of the, uh, one of the, uh, particular topics
that was a particular interest was on how they keep safe
because they have all exper number of them have experienced,
uh, you know, inappropriate behavior to them
as they're own on the campaign trail.
And it does actually deter people from running for office.
And I guess that's the fundamental
point that we want to make.
Uh, we don't want to deter good people from running
for office, uh,
because they feel threatened or abused at any time.
I'll now house hand over to Mayor Tanya, uh,
to see if she's got any comments you'd like to add.
Thank you.
And, um, thank you very much Scott and Mr.
Chair committee members. Um, I'm really just joining to, uh,
back up what the government New Zealand have submitted
and just be very honest with you that, um,
this is a very real issue for us.
Unfortunately, um, as an elected member,
I have faced a number of threats of violence
and also threats that are sexual in nature,
which is very disturbing.
Um, this is something
that the police have had to intervene with.
I've had my windows smashed of my car outside my home.
Um, and the most frightening of all of this is,
you know, I have a family at home.
I've got a 2-year-old baby.
Um, and it's, it's really, really hard
and quite honestly, it was hard for me to come before you,
but I just wanted to stress that, you know,
even though we don't always talk about it,
these are significantly distressing events.
And this bill, we support it
because it completely, um, derisk the potential
that any future elected members, uh, would have
to face this sort of harassment or abuse, um,
or threats that, that do require, um, police involvement.
So, um, unfortunately my story is only one of many.
Um, and we just want to ensure that everyone's safe.
So I do have to admit that I do find it a bit disappointing
and unempathetic to hear from, um, other submitters
that they believe they should have the right to be able to,
um, disrupt and protest outside of our private residence.
There are many public places
and other avenues for them to contact us, um,
that does not require them being on
or near our private property to do so. Thank you very much.
Alright, thank you.
Uh, look, um, both you obviously this is submission that,
um, supports the bill.
What I was gonna ask you is just turn
the question around a little bit.
We've heard a lot today from submitters saying
there's a lack of clarity.
They dunno the decriminalization aspect of the bill.
Um, do you have any views on the way
that the bill could be further improved
that may reflect some of those, um, issues
that people raised with us?
Or do you think the bill in its current state is, is, uh,
fine and need adjustment?
I'm just keen to get whether you think we
need to pull it back at all.
Uh, certainly from my perspective,
and then I'll check if Scott has our GNZ perspective.
Um, I support the bill in its entirety as it is.
I think it is clear.
And although some other submitters have, um, said, well,
there's other legislation in place that provides protection,
um, I can guarantee you it doesn't.
And even when we're recommended to go
through places like NetSafe, um, you know,
I was literally told call the police when they are
physically harming you,
and why should I wait for that to happen?
And so I think the protesting
outside the home not only protects us,
but it importantly protects our family.
Um, Scott, have you got any comments?
Uh, oh look, just to, uh, add to that look, we, um,
support the bill in entirety.
I mean, it's important obviously
to clarify I guess the differential between, uh,
private property people's homes where they have that right
to enjoyment and peace
and protect families versus, you know, time
and place about where people can protest, uh,
and enjoy freedom of speech and freedom of association.
Um, and,
and all of those rights which are critically important
to obviously democracy.
Uh, I, you know, we do have examples, uh,
fairly recent examples of, um, uh, meres
or ex meres, you know, actually
being subject to home invasion.
So, you know, I think we do need to be very cognizant
of the fact that we want people
and need people to put their hand up
to serve their communities.
Um, but if we don't protect those people,
uh, they simply won't.
Okay. Now I've got a question from Mr. Erford.
Um, thank you Mr. Chair.
I'm keen to understand what the wider implications
of say people protesting at your home, uh,
MEAP would've had on say, your family.
Uh, not just you as the politician,
but the wider implications for you, uh, your husband and,
and your young child as well.
It's, it's incredibly hard.
Um, I've, I have moved house for the purpose
of people found out where I lived.
Um, and I've moved very close to a number of family members
and friends who, um, are at the ready if they had
to come over and help me.
And it, it really sucks that we need
to have these safety plans in place.
And, um, I've just stepped out of a induction session here
where elected members are being taught
how to keep themselves safe.
Um, the impact of protest or any presence
or disruption on our private property at our homes
is really significant.
And just, just supplementary to that, um,
what about the argument that many submitters have made that,
um, you know, you are elected by us, this is our way
of reaching you, whereas, you know,
there's many other avenues
that people can get in touch, right?
So what do you say in response to that sort of argument
that people have been saying?
Yeah, I agree. We are elected to office
and we have an office where we are available to the public,
and that is well outside the normal hours of operation.
We are incredibly available.
You can always email us, people have our phones,
our phone numbers, and we do do community consultation, uh,
on topics that are of interest to the community.
And that's the most appropriate time for people
to have their views heard in a respectful way.
Yeah. I've got a question from Mr. Bates
Cur Tanya. Um, good
to see you and thanks for sharing, um, your story,
albeit challenging, um, for people to listen to.
You may have heard over the course of these hearings,
we've had the suggestion by some submitters
that they should be allowed to say, um, whatever they like,
and some pretty aggrieves things.
I've used the example of the kids like you, um, as you know,
we've got young children, um, jumping on the tramp and,
and protesters and have been willing to say some pretty, uh,
tough things and, and the, the submitters saying
that they think that that's appropriate.
Do you think that there's any basis for, um, appropriate
language or, um, behavior outside our residences as elected,
um, representatives when it affects our young
children, um, and our family?
Whether that be in reality, I it's happened
or the suggestion that they would be willing to do it?
Yeah, absolutely. Um, this is really frightening.
It's really scary to think, um, that our children could, uh,
not only be subject to that,
but also just present when protests are
occurring at our private home.
We know what will happen. We'll shut the doors,
we'll shut the curtains,
and why should, um, our families have
to be locked up like that?
Uh, but I will also admit that I've also, um, had someone
who was unwell who was protesting something, um,
on their way to my grandmother's house
to apparently chop down her trees
and we had to call her, fortunately, a member
of the public saw it being live streamed on Facebook called
the council, got in touch with me,
and, um, we, yeah, we, we, we got involved pretty quickly.
But, you know, having to make a phone call
to my grandmother, you know, it's not just us
and our residents, it's, it's our family,
it's our loved one, it's the people we care about.
And that is the reality that we as politicians
and elected members face, which is why I support this bill
and I believe it's so important.
And Scott might have something to say too.
Yes. Look, can I just add, I mean, we, uh, know of, uh,
scenarios and examples where elected members have had
to actually approach, um, their school teachers
and principals at secondary school to talk to the teachers
and principal about how the school can help
keep their kids safe.
Uh, and that really is not satisfactory.
And again, that just puts people off running for office.
All right, now talking about mayors, we've got, um, Cly,
Wade Brown wanting to ask you a question.
Thank you very much. And, um,
congratulations on your reelection.
I I had a couple of questions I
and I fully sympathize about, um, some of the unpleasantness
that you and your family have, um, suffered.
However, I wondered whether
something like breaking the glass is obviously, um, uh,
already an offense.
Um, did the police deal effectively with the person
that was breaking the glass?
Is one question.
And secondly, um, do you have any concern that
n is not sufficiently defined
and could be viewed differently by, um, a protestor
and the police, for example?
Yeah, so unfortunately the police did,
uh, react very quickly.
They've been very, um, supportive
and, um, fortunately there was camera footage
available in this instance.
So we are very grateful that there has recently been support
for election members to, um, have funding
for security systems at home.
That's been incredibly valuable. Thank you.
Um, and in regards to your question regarding near, I,
I think near is okay
because whether they're standing on the corner
or across the road, the purpose of them protesting
to you in your private residence is that they are wanting
to disrupt you in your private residence.
Um, so the intention is there.
Good answer. Alright. Um, very helpful to both of you.
I wanna thank you, uh, for joining us this afternoon.
It's been good to get a perspective.
Alright, enjoy your conference right now.
We is lost, so we're going to next just came.
Oh, have they? Oh, Samir.
I don't know if we've got anybody
Else. We're just waiting
on, um, Catherine,
she should be online soon.
Catherine home, home.
The team's trying to get it, uh, early
Right. Members we're
just, um, take a moment. Mute.
Do you wanna go back to her
and have we got many others after her?
Uh, we'll just contact, we'll
Contact some to see if they can
Come. Okay.
Right. We'll go back live.
Just
Kind line.
Okay.
Hello, Catherine, is that Catherine home?
Yes, that's right. Yes. Hello.
Thank you for joining us this afternoon.
Uh, we've got got you for five minutes.
Looking forward to hearing what you've got to say.
Um, all right. Um, I'm pretty brief.
Um, I am currently, I'm Catherine Hall.
I'm currently studying at, um, Vic Uni as a student
of criminology, psychology and political science.
Um, so obviously political things
are kind of interesting to me.
Um, and this kind of overlaps everything.
I just think that the bill is overly broad
and potentially purposefully vague.
Um, while this bill's presented as a way
to protect people from harassment at their homes,
its wording is so vague at risk
criminalizing legitimate protest.
Um, the bill doesn't actually define what it counts
as being near a residential premise.
Is that five meters? Is it 50 meters or a whole block?
Um, and if we take it
that literally even the beehive sits within walking distance
of residential apartments and homes.
So would a protest at Parliament
or much of Wellington City Center now technically be
near someone's home?
This VAs I don't think it's accidental
and it's what make the bill dangerous.
Um, it leaves far too much discretion in the hands of police
and courts to decide what counts
and that discretion may be used unevenly
and depending on who's protesting and why.
Um, there's no genuine gap in the law that I can see
that this actually, this bill fills.
Um, it's there, there's like,
there's already things like the summary offensive acts,
which regulates this already behave unlawful assembly.
Um, and if people protest outside of home crosses aligned
into, like, if that causes aligned into genuine harassment,
the police already have powers to act.
Um, and adding another layer
of law might only create confusion.
Um, and it doesn't actually kind of make anything clearer
to either the police or like the citizens of New Zealand.
Um, it really does actually also infringe
on democratic rights.
Um, this bill of risks eroding the freedom of expression
and peaceful assembly, which is protected under the
New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990.
Um, I think it sends a wrong message that visibility
and disruption are problems to be policed rather than signs
of a functioning democracy.
Um, and so it's,
I think it's also potent have the potential of, um,
hang on, let's see what it says.
Um, it may not be un like evenly applied, um,
because discretion is a very vague and hazy subject.
It's, that's where kind
of like certain people's biases lurk.
Um, and I think overall this bill's too broad, too vague,
and really quite too unnecessary while in risking infringing
on the rights of people while not doing it enough
to protect the people from genuine harm
by people being the citizens.
Um, so yeah,
I think the main point is like even when the parliament
itself stands near residential premises, it shows
how ill-defined and overreaching this legislation truly is.
So I urge the committee to reject the bill instead of
focusing and focus on upholding the balance between privacy
and protests that already exists in the law.
Right. Hey, thank you for that, um, uh, introduction.
Any members got any comments?
So, um, your, your key thing, you,
we've got three I see in your submission,
but the definition of, uh, residential, if you were
to be clear about it, are you saying it other than
you, clearly you used the reference of, of an embassy
in parliament, so you, how would you better define that?
Um, I think you need to have clear definitions of
what counts, um,
because if this vagueness continues, like the,
which happened in 2020
because that went through all of Wellington,
that would've been potentially kind of classified
as an illegal thing if a judge decided to say
that it was so, so
It need to be targeted at a particular residence.
It can't be just a general walk past.
Yeah. So I think it's, I just, I still don't think
that if it's a targeted protest at Parliament,
because if you are, it's not necessarily, you are not saying
the, the bill doesn't actually say you are
targeting a residence.
It's targeting like something near a residence
from my understanding.
Okay. So there like that lack of clarity.
So if, if you are targeting someone's residence, um,
there should also be laws covering that anyway.
Um, so I just, I personally think that it's,
it's a little bit of overreach.
Thank you for that nuance.
Um, we've got a question from Ms. Nla.
Do we have time Mr. Chair, Just quickly? Yep.
Okay. Um, Catherine, so you mentioned the, um,
the laws around harassment.
Yeah. So what is the remedy if someone, um, uh, is them to,
if you're saying that they, that they, that this, um,
engagement can fit under the laws around harassment?
Um, yeah, it's the, okay, I'll get to the point.
The difference for me is that the law we are trying
to do here is much more targeted
and a more, um, instant response than applying for an order,
um, in the court.
And I feel based on some of the examples, we've heard
that in situations it's necessary instead of waiting
for weeks to get a, um, a a a protection order.
Surely there there's like something
that like if someone's like hurting someone
and property's getting damaged, surely
that you can call like the police straight away.
So there's that, if there's an immediate threat, there is
that kind of thing to immediately kind of
Correct About children.
No, I've got one more question.
I've got one more question.
Um, I've got Mr. Bates, Mr. Bates, and then we're gonna
Thank you Chair. Um, Catherine,
given how quickly protests can escalate, uh,
and given the heightened challenge we have, uh, in,
in the world today, do you think we should have to wait
to see if our family and our children are put at risk
before a protest outside our house is shut down?
Or isn't it reasonable to expect
that while you can protest me wherever I happen
to be at my office in public, et cetera, that my family
and my children and those of my colleagues, regardless of
what side of the house they sit on, um, are able
to stay safe in their residential private home Yep.
Like In their residential private home?
Yes, but this is not, this is not necessarily saying
that this is kind of the bill is kind
of saying well, saying actually.
So that's,
Yeah.
Okay. No, carry on.
Catherine, I want to hear what you say.
Um, so like,
I think the bill doesn't necessarily say
particular residential homes.
Like it's not saying you are like it's saying near.
So this is the thing, like
this is why it's, it's vague.
Yeah. This is your, this is your one. Alright.
Hey, thank you very much for your contribution today.
Been helpful, thank you.
Right now, uh, we have got
these against on the last page.
Last page, right. And we got gentlemen here, right?
We've got, um, we're gonna jump right to the back members
communities against alcohol harm.
Uh, we apparently they're ready to roll
if, uh, anyone's from, is it Charlie from,
uh, oh, there you are.
Regional me saying. Nice to see you.
Nice To See you. Sorry.
Yeah.
Now we've got 10 minutes with you.
Fantastic. That's excellent.
Um, uh, so I am, uh, my name is Charlie Underhill.
I am a spokesperson for Communities Against Alcohol Harm.
We serve the entirety of Art Tier.
I, myself am based in, uh, Tam Makoto.
Um, uh, this is my first time submitting
to Parliament in this way, so I, um,
appreciate any guidance you may wish to give me
and what you wish to hear, but I thought I would begin with,
uh, just presenting our submission, uh, orally to you
and then go from there if that is appropriate.
Yeah, very everyone's
what everyone has read your submission, so you don't need
to, uh, go through it verbatim, right?
It'd be good if you just leave a little bit of time,
but, um, maybe highlight something that's a bit different
or particular of importance
Fan. Fantastic.
Um, so, uh, I guess the most important, uh,
aspect of, uh, the, this law that this new proposed bill
that we were concerned about
because we support communities across our Tiera, um, in
participating meaningfully in predominantly local alcohol
licensing processes.
But that is, uh, in a broad, broader sense.
We see that as, um, us supporting people in
participating in the local democracy
of their local government
and obviously national government democracy also, uh, um,
affects the way that they can participate.
And there have been some cases where, uh, protest peaceful
and respectful protest has occurred in communities
where they believe, um, alcohol, uh, pre, uh,
premises should not, or they do, um, they object
to the way in which those, um, licenses are being, uh, um,
either applied or anything and things like that.
Um, our position is that the amendment bill
in its current form is unnecessary, inconsistent,
and is overly broad.
Uh, the, the word near residential premises concerns us as,
uh, that is a very vague term in in our, um, in our opinion.
And we don't, and we don't know.
And it is not clear to us as to
what near a residential area could entail.
Um, in our personal experience, a lot
of premises can be in residential areas
and indeed next door.
And, um, we believe that the term near just creates, um,
uh, unnecessary confusion
and potentially is, um, is not something
that we think would be democratic in that way.
Uh, in our view, introducing a new offense, risks,
duplication, confusion,
and unnecessary expansion of police powers.
Overall, we think that this amendment is unnecessary as, um,
there are always already extensive tools in place to respond
to behavior that threatens peace or privacy.
Um, in, in current, for example, the Crimes Act, um, again,
we just want to stress that we believe in the freedom
of speech and democratic participation
for all New Zealanders.
And, and this bill will may unnecessarily com complicate
or indeed prevent people.
Um, we also believe that the lack of safeguards
and warnings, um, does not provide opportunity
or encouragement to police to issue a warning
before removing or arresting demonstrators.
Um, we find that very concerning
and, uh, this absence of a warning
as due process is inconsistent with other legislation such
as the Crimes or Trespass Act,
which provide clear procedures
before enforcement applications.
Um, finally we urge Parliament
to reject the amendment in its current form.
Hey, thanks Charlie. We've got three questions.
So first one from Ms. Ley.
Mm-hmm. Hi Charlie. Thank you.
Um, and welcome to the, um, submission process.
Charlie, um, you were ending there with saying
that you believe in your organization, um,
believes in freedom of speech.
Mm-hmm. So does freedom of speech extend to targeting, um,
children of public figures?
Um, uh, that, that's, that's a complex question.
Um, obviously, uh, I think freedom
of speech in any democracy should be
reasonable and respectful.
Um, uh, our personal opinion
and our personal experience as an organization is
that we wish to protect Tamari in all regards regardless of
what side of the fence or the argument they are on.
And so as an organization we would not condone targeting,
um, the children of people like that.
Um, I could speak further to this personally,
but I'm not here in a personal capacity, so I would,
I won't, I won't do that.
Um, uh, I can provide further of, um,
a more constructive answer to you from one of our, um,
from one of our other team members, uh,
if you'd like something a bit more detailed in that, um, in
that regard as I'm, unfortunately I'm not, uh, uh,
legally trained or anything like that's,
and so what I've I'm speaking to is very broad. Yeah.
Alright, now we've got a question from Celia. Wade Brown.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you Chair. Um, thank you Charlie
for speaking to us today.
Um, I was interested in your comparison
with existing law, um, particularly about the absence
of police having to give a warning.
Um, given we don't fully,
I don't think the law is,
or the proposed law is not fully clear about ought to know,
um, would requiring the police to give a warning first,
um, in case somebody really didn't know,
the police might think they ought
to know there was somebody living in that place,
but they might be just protesting outside embassy
outside a proposed liquor store
and not know that there was someone living there.
Would that, I mean, if we had,
if we end up having this bill, would that be a minor change
that would at least improve things?
Um, the, the, I mean,
the question you're asking is a condition if the bill were
passed, and I'd just like to restate that we do not
recommend that this bill has passed, first of all.
Um, uh, however, I think, um,
again, that that offers a lot of vagueness.
So what you've just said about, uh, in terms of, um,
an embassy and someone living at the embassy, um,
that's something we as an organization don't,
don't generally, um, involved with in terms
of our professional capacity,
but, uh, sometimes, uh, protests, you know, should,
should be brought to the attention
of the person potentially working
there as well as living there.
Um, but sorry, to back to your, to your direct question
in regards to police giving warning to people,
if people didn't know that someone lived there, I,
I would say that that would be a bare minimum condition
and yes, I would expect that to happen,
but I do not believe that that is, um, necessarily a reason
to pr pass this bill.
Alright, now I've got one more. Thank you very much.
I've got one more question for Mr. Bates.
Thanks Charlie. Uh,
and appreciate um,
the time you've taken to present to us today.
We've had a few people talk about this question of near, uh,
including one person who talked about it,
but actually was referencing being on the boundary
of the property they were referring to anyway.
Mm-hmm. I suppose what's complexing me is isn't it gonna
become self-evident in
that why would someone protest 300 meters down the road from
my house if they're trying to get my attention?
So isn't it gonna naturally have a boundary of logic
and reason that's gonna occur based on, you know,
where the residence is?
It, it, it seems to be something
that everyone's beating up is a big issue,
but is self evident?
I I I can absolutely understand your perplexity there.
I think, um, the nature of boundary,
particularly when you're talking about private homes
and residential homes, um, can be super, super clear.
But when you are talking about, for example, an embassy, uh,
or in our case, um, potentially liquor stores
that have entranceways that are technically private,
but then the protest could be happening, um, nearby
outside a residential home
or something like that, technically, um, the, the,
the question of near just becomes very vague.
And for example, an embassy that is say on the 10th floor
of an office building, right, is being on the public street
outside class as near,
or do they have to be on the ninth, 10th,
or 11th floor to be near the residence?
Um, that's, that's something that I have kind of, um,
wondered about and potentially, um, questioned about and,
and that that would be what I would ask in,
in response to your question there.
Um, I also just think using vague language in amendment
bills such as this can become quite dangerous
and again, can cause unnecessary confusion.
And that is a concern that we, um, have is, um, the lack
of clarity around the language can open up potential
confusion and potential harm to the public
and also the police potentially to, um, not be able
to act in the, in their best interest either.
Alright. Hey, thank you Charlie.
I've gotta say this is your first time you've done,
you've done very well.
Appreciate and thank you. Your cats had a starring role.
Sorry, your cat had a starring role isn't
Yes, I, I do apologize.
I work from home and, um, he's been out all day
and I thought I'd just caught it in time.
So I appreciate good
Understanding. Hey, thank
you. Hey, thank you Charlie. Lovely to see you.
Lovely. Okay, now, um, please come to the front.
Now are you Mr. Harford? Is it, oh, sorry.
Caden Hunter, Mr. Hunter. Oh, Caden, thank you.
We've just got a couple of people coming through right now.
We've got five minutes with you. Looking forward to hearing.
Okay. Uh, Kiara, I am Caden Hunter, speaking
as an individual and representing myself.
I wish to extend a very special thanks
to the diligent people working at the Select
Committee for inviting me today.
I'm sure it's been a long day
and an even longer year for you all,
and I will keep this short and sweet for you.
Um, I do not support this bill in its current form.
I believe it is far too broad
and poses a major, poses a major risk to freedom of speech
and the right to protest in this country.
I live in Wellington and the city has a vibrant,
active protest culture, one that I engage
with very regularly.
As such, I'm quite familiar with many of the popular
locations for such de demonstrations.
I'm also aware that there are many places
of residents throughout the city, nestled
between businesses in and around prominent buildings.
Like some of the embassies, a very common place
for demonstrations is Cuba Street,
which I know has a vast history of protest culture
and generally bust bustling with all manner of activity.
I also know there's quite a few apartments in the area.
I believe this bill, if it should pass, could put an end
to protest actions on Cuba Street
and many other areas in the city.
I won't deny, I do believe people have a right to safety
and peace in their own homes,
especially in the political landscape
after COVID lockdowns where threats to government officials
has become a lot more common.
It is clear something needs to be done,
but I don't believe in limiting
peaceful demonstrations in this,
in the way the bill has put forward
is the way to go about it.
I think the premise of this bill is a flawed way
to address the problem at hand,
which is threats to government workers.
I can only see this as a means
to limit freedom of expression.
I would propose in future a different bill,
which specifically sets out to protect the safety of,
of government workers and citizens
as its focus rather than a broadly
and vaguely defined piece of legislation
that could easily be exploited
and abused to shut down public expression.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you. Now, first question from Mr. Bates.
Thanks so much for your presentation.
Thanks for coming, uh, today,
just your example about Cuba Street, so mm-hmm.
Appreciate that it's a place for protest and mm-hmm.
Um, that there are also residential
properties on Cuba Street.
Mm-hmm. My understanding, though is that this would only,
uh, could curtail a protest if you were protesting someone
who lived on Cuba Street mm-hmm.
Specifically and intentionally. Okay.
So I'm, I'm just wondering if that's your understanding
or if, or if I've just helped you understand that,
Uh, you just helped me understand that, so, okay, great.
Oh, cool. Cool. Alright. Any other questions, Scott?
Thank you. Hey, thank you.
And thank you for coming this, uh, this afternoon.
Um, I know it's a short presentation,
but you've been listening here.
I know. And, uh, all, everything that you've, um,
that people are saying has all been taken to the mix.
So thank you for doing that. Thank you very much.
Go protest. Simon O Simon O'Neill. Cool.
Just Simon. SJP O'Neill.
Thank you.
Sorry, Simon,
if you can hear us, we can see your googly thing going round
and round and round, but I'm just having a bit
of trouble connecting.
Oh, there you are. Now we can't hear you.
We can't hear you Ms. O'Neil. Sorry. Right. Yeah.
Oh, there we are. We can hear you now,
Right? Okay.
You can hear me and see me.
We, we can both even better. And we've got five minutes.
Okay, thank you. Um, I'll keep it very short, like, um,
many of the others here, but I know it's probably been a
long, a long day for you.
Um, I'd just like to say I, I don't support this bill for,
um, for a number of reasons.
Um, firstly, having been involved in local government
for a number of years, um,
and having been on either side of perhaps unpopular
or, um, divisive topics, I've had the odd protest
outside my gate
and that sort of thing, um, where I felt I haven't been able
to deal with that myself.
Um, it's never been a problem.
Not that it happens a lot, um, just making a call
to either the council
or the police, whether it's an actual, uh, a noise issue
or something that's actually targeting privacy
or perhaps safety to get a response from, um,
local authorities really, really quickly.
Now, I do live semi rurally, uh, in rural Paju district.
So it might be that we have left less calls on our
resources, therefore they're more responsive, um, if
that's a problem in urban areas, I'm not sure if
that's an actually legal issue as opposed
to a resourcing one.
But my point is in my, in my direct experience of this,
that the current laws work whether you are calling for, um,
some sort of intervention because of the noise generated.
And often that's what protestors will do, is just make noise
to disrupt and, um, at all hours of the night.
Uh, I'm not a lawyer,
but I've spent a lot of time working in public policy
and around law, and I think if you were gonna proceed
with this, it needs to be a lot, a lot more precise.
Um, we've, we've heard like the previous three
or four speakers talking about the proximity, uh, thing.
And I take, um, uh,
Carl's point about if they're targeting me,
they're gonna be outside my house.
But, um, I think if you're gonna look at that,
there are other ways of disrupting without being directly
outside your front door.
And noise is a really effective one, trust me on that.
Um, so I think it needs to be very precise about
what the actual offenses might be, what the proximity
or how you measure the level of disruption.
Um, I agree with the other speakers who said, I think
for something like there's a lot of protesters are motivated
by perhaps wanting to do the right thing,
but doing it the wrong way.
And that's what I think you really do need some
graduated scale for this before at the moment.
There's nothing in this, in the, in the,
in the draft legislation provides that escalation.
And I think for something like this, you do need some form
of escalation, um, just
to make it clear to all parties.
And I think that's often a good means of being able
to deescalate a situation as well
where both parties are aware we are starting at the bottom
step and then slowly ramping up
as it's written at the moment.
Um, I think the scope
for perhaps an unnecessarily heavy ended response, um,
and I, I would be concerned about that,
the way it's written at the moment.
So those, those are my main three points.
I think the current law, um, is adequate or current laws.
Uh, I think we do need to work more, uh,
if we're gonna proceed with this on working
around prox definitions of proximity
and perhaps within air shop should be part of that.
And then also looking at some very clear,
precise escalation guidelines within the law. Thank you.
Right. Hey, thank you. I've got first question from Mr.
Rutherford.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. My, uh, Simon, first question.
We had, um, mayor SEL from the Rut Lakes Council just
present to us and give sort
of an alternative view to the what you gave.
Um, how, how would you feel if you were, say,
in someone's position like hers
where you had a young family, for example, do you think
that would change your response to how you would feel
around your safety out inside your own home?
No. Be to,
to qualify against my own experience when I've
needed to call for a assistance.
I think that's been twice in nine years.
Uh, the assistance has been forthcoming.
Um, and for us, where I am now, um, uh, we are what,
20, 25 kilometers from the closest police station,
uh, or council office.
'cause once they responded, it was noise control
and that was an effective way of dealing with the issue.
Um, we've, we've had a, a swift response.
Um, I don't support in any way any sort of protest
that targets, um, whanau or, or,
or people's kids with or anything like that.
I think that that's off the table
anyway, now that's going on.
I think there is a legitimate
police response that deals with that.
So if there's a threat to, to health
or safety, I think current law still covers that.
Um, I, I, I'm aware of some of the, um, uh, experiences
that, um, yeah, tap's been through
and I, I understand your concerns,
but I think the current law should be working
to address those without needing any more work.
What about the recent example we saw at Winston Peter's
home where, um, protestors were outside,
they then damaged and vandalized his personal property.
Um, how, how is that acceptable
and how is the current legislation enabling
or not preventing that from happening? I,
I'm, I'm aware of the, um, of that particular incident,
I haven't looked into it in depth at all.
Um, my understanding was that perhaps the vandalism of Mr.
Peter's home and the protest weren't directly linked.
But that's just my understanding of not, you know, I,
I haven't followed it really closely.
Um, but,
and I'm also not aware of
what calls were made on the police when the protest first
started, uh, even on council noise control.
So, uh, once I don't, I, I am,
I don't support targeting people in their homes.
I don't, I don't think it's an effective way of, of,
of protesting just as I don't support, you know,
if Mr. Peters was down at the market or something like that
and he had some, someone following him round
of the loudspeaker, I still
think that's an invasion of privacy.
Uh, but I think we've still got current laws
that, that, that deal with that. Yeah.
Right. I've got Mr. Bates. Thanks, chair.
Thanks Simon for, uh, presenting
to the select committee today
and welcome, uh, here virtually from the Rupe who, um,
Simon, following on from Tom's point, and,
and I know that you've referenced mine about the nearness
part and the fact that there are some laws in place already.
I suppose the question is,
don't you think it's not unreasonable
that we just make it really clear that engaging in protest
activity that disrupts family, particularly those of us
that have young family, uh, in our private residences,
is not acceptable in New Zealand?
You can protest at my office,
you can protest when I'm visiting A-A-A-A-A business
or doing something, you know, out and about,
but protesting at our private residences, um,
is just not appropriate and it is not Kiwi.
Um, I would argue
that it's probably not a good reflection on this,
but it probably is very kiwi.
Um, we tend to go to the point, the source
of the problem as we perceive it.
I don't agree with that, but I think it, it's
that if you look at the history of protest in New Zealand,
that does happen an awful lot.
Um, and it's not driven from the outside.
But like I said, I don't, I don't support targeting,
you know, if I have a problem with you, Carl,
I'm gonna come in to you, come
and see you in office, drop you an email, you're
Always welcome to. Yeah.
Um, and
after the next election, possibly, we'll have to,
because I think we fall under your patch. But yeah, I
Like that thinking.
Yeah, careful what you wish for.
But, um, but yeah, I would never go to your home.
Anish, perhaps you'd invited me for something, you know,
a an offline chat or something,
but to, to stand outside your house or anyone's house
or where their kids are.
Um, but if we're gonna go down that line,
I think if we are targeting
or we are trying to protect the family, the,
the home environment of, of anyone,
not just our politicians,
but anyone who might be targeted, then this is what I mean,
we need, I think we need to go back
and rethink what we're doing here,
because I can't protest outside your house,
but I can go down to your kids' school, you know,
you see if, if we're gonna go down this path, I think
I can't protest outside your house anymore.
Where are you next most vulnerable?
Is it when you're dropping your kids off
or when you're in Wellington
and your partner's dropping your kids off?
So I think, uh, I'm,
I'm dead set against the whole Yeah, fair question.
Yeah. So I think if we're gonna do this, I think we need
to step back from it a bit
and actually look, um, I guess, yeah, I'm military trained,
so look at what the threat is
and then how do we deal with it at the moment, this is,
in some ways really, really broad
and in other ways it's like super, super narrow.
And I think if you brought this in
and it's current format, all be doing is
deflecting that, that hazard
or that threat somewhere else where you are, where you are,
where you are vulnerable, um, which I don't, I if, you know,
just running with the intent of what we wanna do here.
Yep. I, I think in its current form,
it's not gonna actually fix what we want to fix.
Mm-hmm. Um, you, you, you know what I mean?
Uh, you put a wall around your house,
so they're just gonna go to the next, you know, gaps
and services, is what we used to call it.
You've put a surface in, they're gonna find the next gap
where they can start to get to you
and start playing with your mind,
your head or your families.
So in that, I, I think this still needs quite a bit of work.
Appreciate the provocative thought. Yeah. All right.
Thank you, Ms. O'Neill.
Been very helpful and, um, uh,
really enjoyed your presentation.
Thank you very much. Right.
Cheer now, um, we have got, uh,
I
assume, hello.
Hello. Nice to see you.
Like now we've got five minutes with you.
Yep. Uh, starting now or?
Yeah, yeah, just when you're ready. Alright.
So, um, I
so stand firmly against this bill on sort a central basis
that, as I see it, the bill, um, in its fact
that allows the police to
start arresting people at these sort
of declared protests without just cause.
And as the bill states, um, if they're going to affect, um,
it would not be a, a protest engaged of some outside
of someone's house and the police are allowed
to get in further actions.
It is, as I understand it, the police are allowed
to just start arresting people without warning.
Is that what the bill,
It doesn't include a warning Complaint.
It doesn't include a, it does not include
A warning, not Right.
So that seems to me to be a drastic measure,
thus would require a drastic threat to be appropriate.
And what I would argue is that not only are these protests
not an appropriate threat,
they in fact make people less safe.
So 99% of protests across this country, across the world,
really of this kind are not violent, are not dangerous,
do not result in a property damages
and do only protests that tend
to create violence are one started by groups
that are already violent, such as Destiny's Church.
Um, so the response of being able
to arrest people without warning
is a extreme escalation against a crime, not even a crime,
an action that is, has no evidence of leading
to consistently violence.
Um, and on that, the nature of the itself, um,
provides a enormous basis, as you know, has been mentioned
by speakers that there's fear of ting politicians houses,
but that's not what the law says.
This says any residential premises.
If I, I'm in Dunedin, if I wanna protest,
walk down the Octa, walk down you to the octagon,
there's flats along there.
Am I walk? I don't, we are not in any way engaged
with the people in those flats,
but we would be targeted by that if we want
to stand in the harbor.
There are people, there are people living
and around these public areas that could be tentatively, um,
protesting and around a residence.
So that's the way, so the first point that
this is a drastic escalation against an action
that does not consistently lead to violence.
And the second point that I see this escalating violence as,
as shown as mentioned by the sort
of violent attack against Mr.
Uh, minster, Mr. Peter's home.
There is a lot of unrest and anger in this country.
And protest is a form of way to, um,
express dissatisfaction, express anger in a constructive
and nonviolent way.
And as seen time
and time again when the ability to protest is restricted,
when people are threatened with not being able to protest,
that leads in a surge of violent action as people are,
have these feelings, have these emotions, these grievances,
and see no clear way to deal with them,
no clear way to express them.
I mean, regardless of your opinion on violent action against
the government and violent protests,
it is sub it is shown time
and time again across every country.
When the rights to pro to protest
and the ability to protest is restricted
as this bill would do, you see a spike in violent action
as there is all this tension that is no has no way
to be ethically and sort of safely enacted upon.
But then also, just to speak sort
of personally from the heart, I believe that any action
that restricts the right to protest is a very dangerous one.
As these are the, these kinds
of bills are the supporting beams
of fascist indicators of governments.
That's not to say that the current government has any hopes
of being the South Pacific Donald Trump,
but it's, if these kinds of laws are on the book
where any residence, any home with anyone living in it
would, would mean that a protest
outside anywhere a protest near there would allow immediate
active police action.
Those are the kinds of laws that could be exploited
by bad actors, by bad actors within the government
to greatly suppress people's speech.
Um, people's ability to, um, engage in free speech.
Not only that, I have extensive experience in deescalation
tactics and, you know, as someone that has had
to engage the general public and seen the,
and see how quickly things can escalate, um,
the way I see this is you put this kind of ban on protests,
which would squash so many protests
because of how many apartments
and residential areas are scattered across cities.
This could then lead to a counter protest
of a massive protest flavor disregarding these laws at,
to send a message, which would then create police response,
which could then escalate into further violence.
As, as I said, you have all this tension and anger
and dissatisfaction and a seemingly
and a complete clamp down on the ability to express it.
So, you know, that's some of my main points.
Right. Hey, thank you very much.
I've got one question from Mr. Rutherford.
Oh, course. Thank you.
I just want to talk about the point that you raised
around the protest outside of, um,
minister Peter's household.
What was the restrictions placed on the protesters there
that made them resort to violence?
Um, pardon the point, those,
the active violence against Worton Peter's house has no
connection, no known connection
to the protest outside of it.
There was the event that is the protest
outside his house, which were peaceful.
Um, and then there was the unknown
person that acted violence.
Those things are not connected
and I feel is a very dangerous action to try
to connect them when there is no clear evidence showing
that any person involved in that protest,
um, engaged in violence.
But I, one of the points
that you raised in your submission was that, um,
if people feel like their ability to protest is restricted
or limited, then one of the forms
that they will then take is they will resort to violence.
And you used that as a prime example.
So I'm just hoping you can clarify what you meant
with that in your submission.
Please.
What I meant is
that these are all just sort of possibilities.
It could be that thisor goes into place
and there is no escalation of violent by members
of the public, but it is a possibility.
It happens when you restrict.
It is shown as am in the IRA and the rise of the IRA.
They saw massive increases in, um, appointments right
after protests were suppressed.
And the point being that any kind of risk
to escalating violence would require a,
a very good reason to risk that.
And this kind of change, which again,
clamping down on protests which have consistently not
resulted in any kind of actual violence or harm to people
or property that is not a risk, that it's, it's not worth it
to risk an escalation of violence to stop
what is a non generally nonviolent action.
What about the argument that, um, protest on one end
and then violence on the other end are two very clear
differentiations and their worlds apart?
For example, if I felt strongly about something, I would go
and protest, but there is no way I would ever resort
to violence because I know that that is not right
and that is not the right course of action to take.
And that is not how you get your point across, uh,
because you would effectively be breaking the law.
What's to say that just
because you are under this legislation denied the ability
to protest outside of people's private residence,
that people will now suddenly resort to violence
of all sorts of manners?
Well, as I made the point, it is any residence
and the what counts outside residence is very unclear.
And as I said, if I will walk down the main street of, um,
Dunedin with no intention
of bothering people in their private residencies,
I could fall under this law just by happen
of passing by them.
Or if I am, you know, standing inside an occupation area
and there are have to be residences nearby
that would cause me to be at fault of this law.
And as proven by points of sample
and during the troubles in Ireland, um,
there were many people there that did not wish
to engage in violence, but they once their ability
to peacefully protest, once they tried
to peacefully protest over and over again
and that was meant with met with suppression,
they felt they had no other choice.
And that is what I feared, that this is a one action
that could then escalate into further suppression
of people with ability to protest.
And good law abiding people would feel contract
and confronted and feel like,
well I have no other choice now.
I've lost my ability to protest peacefully
and what am else am I going to do?
Alright. Hey, thank you very much for your contribution.
That's been very helpful, a different
insight that we haven't heard.
So really appreciate that.
Well, thank you. Have a good day.
Good, thank you. Um,
now we've got Joshua Harford, is that right?
That's right. I was hoping it was you.
So thank you for tuning up in person.
I think you're our last one today. So the floor is yours.
Lovely. Thank you. Um, so my submission is, uh,
like the other two that we've just heard, uh,
very much against this, uh, particular bill.
I feel that, uh, the, just the way it's written, um,
in particular the, the definitions that are in there,
particularly the definition of a private residence,
for example, um, they're just too broad to be
e essentially effective in this case.
I feel like it on on, at first glance, it
feels like it includes houses,
but then that can also be taken to include, for example,
um, embassies and so on.
And I would argue to say that we suddenly can't protest
outside an embassy is a very grave sort of
restriction on freedom of speech.
Uh, that you, you know, we are, we're as a country, we are
noted for being something
of a leader in the sort of foreign policy space.
And then to say that, well there's this bill that says,
you know, it can be interpreted to say you can't protest
outside this embassy or this ambassador's residence.
I think that's a particularly restrictive, uh, definition
of free speech or rather definition of, uh,
residential address and then a restriction on free speech.
Um, but also just generally the, um, the purpose
of the bill, I find it's kind of trying to solve a problem
that isn't really there in the sense that, you know,
people have talked about, uh, violence
and attacks on, uh, people's homes or on people generally.
Those are things that are already illegal.
And I would argue that someone who wants to do that is going
to do that regardless of whether
or not they're allowed to protest.
And so to say that
because there's violence that would happen regardless of
where the protests can happen, you're no longer allowed
to peacefully protest, I think is sort
of using a potentiality for a problem to sort of go around
and solve a different problem, which is, uh,
well a different solution
or to essentially insulate uh,
elected representatives from opposition.
'cause as, um, I forget his name, one
of the previous submitters, uh, talked about, you know,
if someone wants to harass an, an MP
or at least someone, uh,
and they can't do it outside their home,
they will just do it somewhere else.
Uh, you're not going to prevent sort of harassment
or hassling of mps with this, with this legislation
and things like, uh, attacking, uh, someone's home.
Like in the case of, uh, minister Peters, I would argue,
you know, we can debate whether
or not that was connected to the protest,
but even if it was, I feel that would've happened regardless
because this protest wouldn't, oh,
this bill rather wouldn't stop someone walking down the
street and smashing someone's window.
You know, it's, it's, it's not to say
that we're gonna suddenly wall off streets
that politicians live on, for example.
Um, and so I feel that it would kind of, it's,
it's, it's, it's a, it's far too broad in terms
of legislation and I've articulated this slightly better in
my written submission, but it, it, it is very broad
and I think the, the executional result
of this legislation is going to be, uh,
essentially just a restriction on, on protest on freedom
of speech that we don't need.
And the, the stated objectives for that are essentially
trying to stop things that are already illegal,
will already get you, uh, arrested and and so on.
And so I feel like it's kind of surplus to requirements
and also will have a just generally negative effect on
just the sort of freedom of speech.
'cause I realized freedom of speech isn't enshrined in law
or any sort of constitution in, in Alberto.
So it's, it's important that we don't then use
rather, what's the word here?
Thin, uh, I would argue arguments to restrict a right
that is already something that
could very easily be taken away, um, in this country.
So I think it's important
to ensure that that right is there.
And so, uh, just for those reasons
and I've articulated them slightly better,
as I said in my written submission, um,
which I would be reading off, but I couldn't find a printer.
That's right. No, yes. That's my, uh, the main, just my
Submission. So can I just
ask you a question?
You were here before, um, when we had the mayor from ROT
and the local government
and she was wish was talking about the impact of some of the
protests that she's had, uh,
which you could probably say went beyond being protest,
but her family, did you, were you here for that? Did you
I I wasn't here For that.
I did, yeah. Alright.
I heard it being discussed. I wasn't
So, um, I suppose my question was
there's this, what we heard today, there's a lot
of people demanding the right to protest and,
and New Zealand celebrated that.
And, and I don't think anyone has a problem
with peaceful protests.
That's not the issue even I think everyone agrees with it.
The issue is that when it gets to an extreme or gets,
and particularly around houses, uh, where's family involved
And it was a telling point hearing from a mayor who
was talking at a personal level how, um, degrading
and how difficult it was on a personal life.
And that's the bit that all the protests I've heard today,
no one's really flipped this flipped
and looked at it from the perspective
of an elected official.
And ly what you do do is you end up with elected officials
while people not choosing to become elected officials
because of the implication on their families,
it's already hard enough for social media.
So I'm just, just wondering,
I didn't hear that in your submission.
I haven't heard it really today. Do you have a view on that?
To what extent do we need to be more cognizant of the rights
of individuals to, um, be in a space with their families
where they don't have to endure stuff
that they would normally meet in their office
or wherever we go to do shopping or whatever it might be?
Yeah, look, that's certainly a valid argument.
I'm not, I'm not specifically, uh, familiar with the case
of, I think it was Mayor Tapsell you said.
Yeah. Um, but I, my understanding of
just the way sort of the, uh, the of how,
how it works in terms of whether people actually have
to know where you live, for example, is there, there's,
there's ways, you know, with the unpublished electoral role
and um, tho those sorts of measures, you can sort of
be, have a little bit more privacy in that space.
But also, um,
and I say this, I as a, um, a candidate
for local government myself,
granted not a particularly serious candidate,
but either way, I, I feel there is something that
one generally has to anticipate is that when you're elected
to public office, there is a somewhat
of a reduction in the level of privacy
that one might otherwise have.
Just in the sense of,
and in particular in con in the context of members
of Parliament, for example.
Um, I would personally argue that, you know,
it is entirely possible to, uh,
from my understanding be on the unpublished electoral role
and have those details hidden.
But, um, just generally,
and I, I'm not saying that I condone those
sorts of protests, absolutely not.
Um, but I I I feel to say that, um,
because of instances that went too far
that we can't generally, uh, can't protest at all in,
in that particular space.
Now, I wouldn't personally engage in one of those protests,
uh, but I certainly wouldn't want
to see a peaceful protest being moved along or shut down
because of an incident somewhere else in a different
protest, which WW
was unlawful.
Um, regardless of whether there was a protest, you know,
it's already illegal to, you know, go
and, you know, vandalize someone's property or go
and assault or abuse somebody in public
or even, even in their home.
So I think tho those people who, who seek to do that,
would do that regardless of this bill.
And I think it's a question of sort of
how one protects those officials who are at risk of that
and sort of rather than
restricting protests based on
that, if that kind of makes sense. Yeah. We've
Got a question, Mr. Ps.
Yep. Thanks Chair.
Um, I'm interested in your characterization of the
unpublished role, uh, as a way of sort of protecting
where you live and interested in your understanding of
like in rotor where me tap's from Wang Nui, where I'm from,
how many people do you think you'd have to talk to, uh,
locally in order to find out which suburb I live in
and where my house is at?
Well, I imagine that is a relatively small number,
but on that same point, I would argue that if someone wanted
to stage that protest to harass you
or whatever, that is something they would do regards whether
they could do it at your house, they might do it.
And I'm just going, um, sort of supplementing, I guess.
Yeah. Or one of the previous limiters said it's something
that they, that those people who would seek to intimidate
or harass or hassle you would
otherwise do, you know, if they,
if they can find your address relatively easily,
which I imagine a lot of smaller towns
or cities is very much possible.
They could also find out where you do your shopping
and where your kids go to school and so on.
And so those sort of bad actors I guess would kind of,
wouldn't be overly dissuaded, I would argue with this. So,
Yeah. So, so
on just on the point about the where the kids go
to school and the where you might go shopping,
and I take the point from the previous submitter
to a degree, don't you think there's a big difference
between a group of protestors saying, we're gonna protest
outside the house of me taps or the house of MP Carl
and going, we're gonna protest outside, pack and save
because it's a Sunday
and Carl might be coming in, uh, to buy his groceries?
So, sorry, your question was
The difference, well the suggest make is that, um,
if they're not allowed to protest outside my house,
they might protest outside where I go shopping.
Don't you think that's a very different thought process
and an action to take to go, well, we're not,
we can't protest outside his house, so let's protest it pack
and say, because he might come into a shopping here today.
Like the likelihood of that happening, is it a,
is it really a serious, you know, substitution for the type
of people who we're talking about, uh, protesting
outside their homes like Axels, um, already?
Well, I, I, I think in the case of someone who would want
to target, uh, in this case, you in particular,
that's something that if they particularly wanted
to target you for whatever reason, um, I feel like
that's something that they would do.
Um, whether it's, you know, where you go shopping
or, you know, just sort of generally kind of,
I guess stalking is the word.
Again, those are things that are, you know,
if they are actually harassing
and so on, which, you know, I I have no way
of knowing whether or not there's hypothetical protests
would do that or indeed the actual
ones, I'm not familiar with that case.
But in the case where there is a real
or perceived threat of violence or harassment
or anything along those lines, um, my understanding is that
those can already be moved along and shut down
or controlled by police or by counsel.
And so it kind of,
to me seems like they're trying to ban something
that is already illegal
and in doing so, could sort of sweep along with it.
Uh, the, uh, the sort of just ability to protest
and also just in the case of,
and you know, w we using Whanganui as an example,
it would be hard to argue that the approach would be
anything other than targeting you.
But if we think about it in the context of say, a city
where you talk about parliament, right, uh,
it is being overlooked by the Kate Shepherd Departments,
which is where a number of, uh, members of parliament, uh,
reside, at least when they're in Wellington.
Um, one could argue that we need to curtail protests in
and around Parliament because they are visible and
or sort of directly in contact with a residential premises
where a lot of Alito members live.
And it can sometimes,
and I appreciate this isn't the case in Wang,
but it is certainly the case in Wellington
and that's something that would be addressed through just
more targeted language in the legislation.
But it, it seems to me that one could make a sort
of an argument that a protest that isn't meant
to be targeting a person or a group
or an individual, um, could then be characterized
to be doing that based on sort of being present or visible
or, uh, audible from that location, for example,
with the Kha apartments in Wellington
or any other sort of hotel or apartment.
Hey, now thank you for your contribution.
Um, we've given you plenty of time,
but Pete thank you for turning up today.
Uh, very helpful.
Always Peter to turn up in person, but thank you.
Now, um, members we're going to go into private session, um,
that's the end of the public submission today,
so we're gonna go back into private submission.
So you have to move and thank you. You'll have to, yeah.